SEP 29, 19:25
Top BP executive in US Dave Lawler to leave company
Jamie Smyth in New York
© Bloomberg
BP’s top executive in the US is leaving the company just weeks after the resignation of the company’s global chief executive Bernard Looney.
SEP 29, 21:15
Bill Ackman gets SEC approval for ‘Sparc’ vehicle
Ortenca Aliaj in New York
© REUTERS
Billionaire investor Bill Ackman has received regulatory approval for Pershing Square Sparc, a structure he came up with in 2021 after the Securities and Exchange Commission thwarted his deal to buy a 10 per cent stake in Universal Music Group through his special purpose acquisition company.
Ackman’s Sparc, short for special purpose acquisition rights company, will distribute what it calls special purpose acquisition rights to former shareholders of his Spac Pershing Square Tontine Holdings, which gives them the option but not the obligation to participate in a deal.
Sparc “will immediately begin to pursue business combination opportunities”, the company said in a statement on Friday. It was looking for companies that want to raise a minimum of $1.5bn. 
The announcement included an unusual disclaimer that Sparc would provide information through X, formerly Twitter, in which Ackman is an investor after backing Elon Musk’s take private of the company, and instructed investors to follow Ackman’s account. 
Share $Bill Ackman gets SEC approval for ‘Sparc’ vehicle on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Bill Ackman gets SEC approval for ‘Sparc’ vehicle on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Bill Ackman gets SEC approval for ‘Sparc’ vehicle on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
SEP 29, 21:03
Co-defendant pleads guilty in Georgia election interference case
Stefania Palma in Washington
© via Reuters
Scott Hall, one of the 18 people indicted by the state of Georgia alongside Donald Trump for alleged interference in the 2020 presidential elections, has submitted a guilty plea.
An Atlanta-area bail bondsman who was accused of conspiring to steal voter information in Coffee County, Hall has become the first co-defendant in the case to plead guilty.
He submitted his plea in a Fulton County court on Friday as part of a “negotiated agreement,” according to Judge Scott McAfee.

The other co-defendants have pleaded not guilty.

Hall, 59, pleaded guilty to five misdemeanour counts of conspiracy to commit intentional interference with the performance of election duties.

He has agreed to a probation of five years, a $5,000 fine and to complete 200 hours of community service.
Share $Co-defendant pleads guilty in Georgia election interference case on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Co-defendant pleads guilty in Georgia election interference case on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Co-defendant pleads guilty in Georgia election interference case on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 20:11
Looney accused of promoting BP women with whom he had undisclosed relationships
Tom Wilson and Anjli Raval in London
© Bloomberg
The allegations that prompted Bernard Looney’s resignation from BP included an accusation that the chief executive promoted women with whom he had undisclosed past relationships, according to people familiar with the matter.
The romantic relationships with BP colleagues that are in question all allegedly occurred before Looney became chief executive in 2020 but had not been disclosed to the company, the people said.
Looney’s abrupt departure earlier this month has rocked the 113-year-old British energy group, raising questions over the number and nature of his workplace relationships as well as his conduct while at the helm of the company.
In a response to the Financial Times, BP said that appointments and promotions at the company follow “rigorous hiring and talent management processes” and that no employee, including the chief executive, is able to make unilateral appointments.
Read more on BP here
Share $Looney accused of promoting BP women with whom he had undisclosed relationships on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Looney accused of promoting BP women with whom he had undisclosed relationships on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Looney accused of promoting BP women with whom he had undisclosed relationships on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 18:54
Accounting firm Prager Metis charged by SEC over independence violations
Stephen Foley in New York
Prager Metis, the US accounting firm under fire for its audit of the collapsed crypto exchange FTX, has been charged by the Securities and Exchange Commission for violating independence rules in its work for dozens of other clients.
The firm insisted that clients indemnify it in case it was sued or fined by regulators for its work in more than 200 audits and other examinations, according to the SEC complaint. US audit rules bar such arrangements because they might make auditors less thorough in checking for fraud.
Prager said it had never enforced the indemnifications and would defend the lawsuit. “We always acted in a way that was independent of our clients,” it said.
Share $Accounting firm Prager Metis charged by SEC over independence violations on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Accounting firm Prager Metis charged by SEC over independence violations on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Accounting firm Prager Metis charged by SEC over independence violations on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 18:28
Ford CEO says UAW is holding up deal over future battery plant jobs
Claire Bushey in Chicago
© Getty Images
Ford chief executive Jim Farley said on Friday that the United Auto Workers are refusing to reach a deal because they want to protect future jobs for workers building batteries for electric vehicles.
“We could have reached a compromise on pay and benefits, but so far the UAW is holding the deal hostage over battery plants,” he said. “Keep in mind, these battery plants don’t exist yet.”
The UAW has been on strike against Ford, General Motors and Stellantis for two weeks.
Electric vehicle production is an existential issue in the UAW’s dispute with carmakers because EVs and their supply chains are largely non-union.
Share $Ford CEO says UAW is holding up deal over future battery plant jobs on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Ford CEO says UAW is holding up deal over future battery plant jobs on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Ford CEO says UAW is holding up deal over future battery plant jobs on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 17:35
Fed’s Williams expects 2.5% inflation in 2024
Colby Smith in Washington
© Bloomberg
A top official at the Federal Reserve has said the US central bank is “at, or near, the peak level” of its benchmark interest rate now that price pressures have eased more notably.
In prepared remarks on Friday, John Williams, a permanent voter on the Federal Open Market Committee and a close ally of chair Jay Powell, struck an optimistic tone about the outlook for inflation and the economy more broadly.
He said he expected economic growth to slow next year to about 1.25 per cent as inflation moderated to 2.5 per cent and the unemployment rate edged slightly higher to just over 4 per cent. 
Share $Fed’s Williams expects 2.5% inflation in 2024 on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Fed’s Williams expects 2.5% inflation in 2024 on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Fed’s Williams expects 2.5% inflation in 2024 on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 17:26
Risers and fallers in the US
Alexandra White in New York
Share moves to note on the New York Stock Exchange on Friday include Nike, Blue Apron, Vail Resorts and Walgreens Boots:
•
Nike jumped 6.5 per cent on Friday after the athletic apparel and footwear company reported strong demand and a higher-than-expected quarterly profit.
•
Meal kit company Blue Apron surged 133 per cent after announcing it will be acquired by former Walmart executive Marc Lore’s Wonder Group for $13 a share.
•
Ski resort company Vail Resorts fell 7 per cent after reporting a fall in full-year on the year, slightly missing analysts’ expectations.
•
Walgreens Boots rose 6.6 per cent on reports the pharmacy chain operator is considering hiring former Cigna Group executive Tim Wentworth to be its new chief executive.
Share $Risers and fallers in the US on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in the US on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in the US on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 17:06
Carnival Cruise shares sink on warning of $125mn hit from higher fuel costs
Peter Wells in New York
© Getty Images
Carnival Cruise Line warned of an “unfavourable” $125mn hit from the rising cost of fuel, taking the gloss off forecast-beating third-quarter results and sending shares tumbling.
That exceeded the guidance of a $50mn full-year impact issued three months earlier and follows a recent rise in global oil prices.
Carnival on Friday trimmed the top end of its forecast earnings outlook by $50mn in response: it now predicts adjusted Ebitda of $4.1bn to $4.2bn in its 2023 fiscal year.
The cruise line operator reported $1.07bn in net income on record revenue of $6.9bn, thanks to elevated levels of demand in its third quarter.
Carnival shares fell more than 7 per cent during lunchtime trading in New York, while rival Norwegian Cruise Line dropped 3 per cent, making them the two worst performers in the S&P 500 on Friday.
Share $Carnival Cruise shares sink on warning of $125mn hit from higher fuel costs on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Carnival Cruise shares sink on warning of $125mn hit from higher fuel costs on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Carnival Cruise shares sink on warning of $125mn hit from higher fuel costs on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 16:17
US Senate leaders commemorate Dianne Feinstein
Alexandra White in New York
© AP
US Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer and minority leader Mitch McConnell honoured Dianne Feinstein on the Senate floor on Friday, with Schumer choking back tears.
“Today we grieve,” Schumer said in a speech on Friday commemorating Feinstein’s long career in public service. “Today there are 25 women serving in this chamber and every one of them will admit they stand on Diane’s shoulders.”
McConnell said Feinstein was a “trailblazer” and added that the entire nation was better for her “dogged advocacy and diligent service”.
Share $US Senate leaders commemorate Dianne Feinstein on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US Senate leaders commemorate Dianne Feinstein on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US Senate leaders commemorate Dianne Feinstein on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 15:13
SEC doles out $79mn in fines over latest round of messaging violations
Stefania Palma in Washington
© REUTERS
Ten Wall Street businesses have agreed to pay a total of $79mn to the Securities and Exchange Commission in the latest round of penalties stemming from messaging by employees on platforms like WhatsApp.
The SEC on Friday charged broker-dealers and investment advisers — including Perella Weinberg Partners and Interactive Brokers — for “widespread and longstanding failures to maintain and preserve electronic communications”.
The move is the latest salvo against Wall Street’s messaging practices by the regulator, which under chair Gary Gensler has cracked down on messaging misconduct across the industry. The enforcement actions have pushed banks to revisit their messaging policies and sack some employees.
Read more on the SEC here
Share $SEC doles out $79mn in fines over latest round of messaging violations on X (opens in a new window)
Share $SEC doles out $79mn in fines over latest round of messaging violations on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $SEC doles out $79mn in fines over latest round of messaging violations on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 14:56
UAW expands strikes against Ford and GM but Stellantis talks progress
Claire Bushey in Chicago
© Getty Images
The United Auto Workers will expand its strike against Ford and General Motors, but not Stellantis, citing progress with the company at the bargaining table moments before UAW president Shawn Fain was scheduled to address members.
Fain said on Friday that the union will go on strike at Ford’s assembly plant in Chicago, which makes the Ford Explorer sport utility vehicle, and GM’s assembly plant in Lansing, Michigan, that builds the Chevrolet Camaro and Cadillac CT4 and CT5.
The expansion increases the number of striking workers to 25,000 from 18,000. The union represents about 146,000 members at the three Detroit carmakers.
Read more on the UAW here
Share $UAW expands strikes against Ford and GM but Stellantis talks progress on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UAW expands strikes against Ford and GM but Stellantis talks progress on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UAW expands strikes against Ford and GM but Stellantis talks progress on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 14:51
Three Arrows co-founder Su Zhu arrested in Singapore
Nikou Asgari in London
© (c) Mbruxelle | Dreamstime.com
The co-founder of collapsed crypto hedge fund Three Arrows Capital has been arrested in Singapore and will be held in prison for four months, according to the failed company’s liquidator.
Su Zhu was arrested in Singapore’s Changi airport while trying to leave the country, liquidator Teneo said in a statement on Friday. Three Arrows collapsed into bankruptcy last year after using borrowing to turbocharge its crypto bets. Its failure led to plunging token prices and contagion across the crypto industry and its founders have become highly sought by authorities.
Another co-founder of Three Arrows, Kyle Davies, is also sought for his role in the collapse of the hedge fund, “but his whereabouts remain unknown at this point in time,” Teneo said.
Earlier this month, Singapore banned the disgraced founders from participating in the financial sector for nine years.
Share $Three Arrows co-founder Su Zhu arrested in Singapore on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Three Arrows co-founder Su Zhu arrested in Singapore on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Three Arrows co-founder Su Zhu arrested in Singapore on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 13:07
US senator Dianne Feinstein dies aged 90
James Politi in Washington
© REUTERS
Dianne Feinstein, the veteran Democratic senator from California and a pioneer for women in American politics, has died aged 90, according to US media reports on Friday.
Feinstein’s death follows a notable deterioration in her health that had raised concerns among Democrats on Capitol Hill, and heightened the debate in Washington over the older ages of many prominent US politicians.
Until a replacement takes her seat, Feinstein’s death will bring the number of senators who side with Democrats to 50 in the upper chamber of Congress, narrowing the party’s governing majority to just one senator.
Read more on Feinstein here
Share $US senator Dianne Feinstein dies aged 90 on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US senator Dianne Feinstein dies aged 90 on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US senator Dianne Feinstein dies aged 90 on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 13:02
US markets muted despite encouraging inflation data
Kate Duguid in New York
Market reaction to the Federal Reserve’s personal consumption and expenditure index was muted on Thursday, despite data showing that core inflation fell to its lowest level in nearly two years.
Two-year Treasury yields, which move with interest rate expectations, inched up but remained lower on the day at 5 per cent.
The dollar index - also slightly lower on the day - was little moved. US stock market futures were slightly higher. 
Share $US markets muted despite encouraging inflation data on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US markets muted despite encouraging inflation data on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US markets muted despite encouraging inflation data on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 12:54
Fed’s preferred inflation gauge hits lowest level since 2021
Alexandra White in New York
A closely watched measure by the Federal Reserve showed core inflation decelerated in August, as consumer spending weakened, in a sign that elevated interest rates are gradually working their way through the economy. 
The “core” personal consumption expenditure index — which strips out volatile items — fell to an annualised rate of 3.9 per cent, from an upwardly revised figure of 4.3 per cent in July, marking the lowest level since September 2021.
Headline PCE increased to an annualised rate of 3.5 per cent, as expected, from 3.4 per cent in July, owing to higher petrol prices.
Personal consumption, adjusted for inflation, increased by 0.1 per cent in August, up from a 0.6 per cent increase in July, as consumers spent less on big-ticket items.
Share $Fed’s preferred inflation gauge hits lowest level since 2021 on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Fed’s preferred inflation gauge hits lowest level since 2021 on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Fed’s preferred inflation gauge hits lowest level since 2021 on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 12:33
Spain’s opposition leader Feijóo fails in final bid to form a government
Barney Jopson in Madrid
Alberto Núñez Feijóo in the Spanish parliament on Friday, with Cuca Gamarra, his party’s parliamentary spokesperson © Eduardo Parra/EUROPA PRESS/dpa
Spanish opposition leader Alberto Núñez Feijóo has failed in his second and final attempt to form a government following an inconclusive general election, handing the initiative to acting prime minister Pedro Sánchez.
Feijóo, leader of the conservative People’s party, fell short of the parliamentary majority needed to become prime minister on Friday, receiving the same number of votes he had on Wednesday, even though one Catalan lawmaker cast his vote the wrong way then had it annulled.
The result means the king is likely to invite Sánchez to launch his own bid to secure another term within the next two months. To reach a majority Sánchez will need the support of hardline Catalan separatists who are demanding an amnesty in return.
Share $Spain’s opposition leader Feijóo fails in final bid to form a government on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Spain’s opposition leader Feijóo fails in final bid to form a government on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Spain’s opposition leader Feijóo fails in final bid to form a government on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 11:52
Indian natural resources group Vedanta splitting up in face of credit crunch
Harry Dempsey in London and Chloe Cornish in Mumbai
Indian mining and energy group Vedanta Ltd is pushing ahead with plans to spin out its resources businesses into separate listings, as it fights to stave off a debt crunch.
Vedanta Ltd said on Friday that it plans to split into six units — aluminium, power, base metals, steel and iron ore, oil and gas, and Vedanta Ltd — in a sweeping shake-up of one of India’s most important natural resources groups.
The company believes that splitting up the group into separate entities will help to achieve higher valuations, as the conglomerate model falls out of favour among investors.
Share $Indian natural resources group Vedanta splitting up in face of credit crunch on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Indian natural resources group Vedanta splitting up in face of credit crunch on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Indian natural resources group Vedanta splitting up in face of credit crunch on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 10:58
At least 50 killed in Pakistan bomb blasts
Farhan Bokhari in Islamabad
Rescue workers rush a victim of Friday’s blasts to hospital in Quetta, the capital of Balochistan province © FAYYAZ AHMED/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock
Three bomb blasts in Pakistan’s volatile border region with Afghanistan have killed at least 50 people and injured scores of others. The attacks came on a public holiday as the nation celebrated the birth anniversary of the Prophet Muhammad, the last of the Muslim prophets.
In Balochistan province, a suicide bomber blew himself up in a gathering of Muslims. The second and the third attacks were on a mosque and a police station in the north-western Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province. A security official said the attacks were probably carried out by ‘Daesh’ or the Islamic state, which has been involved in terrorist attacks in Pakistan in the past year.
Share $At least 50 killed in Pakistan bomb blasts on X (opens in a new window)
Share $At least 50 killed in Pakistan bomb blasts on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $At least 50 killed in Pakistan bomb blasts on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 10:57
Ten EU states express interest in hosting anti-money laundering agency
Henry Foy in Helsinki
The EU has opened the bidding process for member states to host its new Anti-Money Laundering Authority (AMLA), with 10 countries expressing interest in an agency that will monitor illicit financial flows.
The agency’s location is the first to be selected by a joint decision of the European Council — which represents member states — and the European parliament, a process that has led to concerns over possible delays.
Warning of the looming parliamentary recess before elections next June, EU financial services commissioner Mairead McGuiness said the AMLA decision “should be agreed early next year at the latest”. The deadline for applications is November 10.
Share $Ten EU states express interest in hosting anti-money laundering agency on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Ten EU states express interest in hosting anti-money laundering agency on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Ten EU states express interest in hosting anti-money laundering agency on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 10:16
Global bond sell-off eases as investors welcome inflation figures
George Steer in London
Global bond markets rebounded on Friday at the end of a quarter of heavy losses, helped by signs of easing inflation in the eurozone.
Yields on European sovereign debt slid after data showed that the eurozone’s harmonised index of consumer prices fell to 4.3 per cent from 5.2 per cent. Core inflation, which excludes energy and food and is closely watched by the European Central Bank, fell more than expected to 4.5 per cent, down from 5.3 per cent in August.
Italian 10-year government bond yields fell 0.17 percentage points to 4.75 per cent, having hit their highest level in a decade on Thursday. German 10-year bond yields dropped 0.12 percentage points to 2.84 per cent, having also hit a 10-year high during the previous trading session. Bond yields move inversely to prices.
Share $Global bond sell-off eases as investors welcome inflation figures on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Global bond sell-off eases as investors welcome inflation figures on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Global bond sell-off eases as investors welcome inflation figures on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 10:04
What to watch in North America today
Steff Chávez in Chicago
Inflation gauge: The US Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation gauge, the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, is expected to reach an annualised rate of 3.9 per cent, down from 4.2 per cent in July. Headline PCE is projected to be 3.5 per cent in August, up from 3.3 per cent in July.

Consumer sentiment: The University of Michigan will release the final September reading of its consumer sentiment index, which economists anticipate will be the same as the preliminary level of 67.7.

Fedspeak: John Williams, head of the Fed’s New York branch, will tour Long Island and meet leaders in business and government. He will deliver remarks about the economic outlook at the Long Island Association.

US shutdown: The US government is heading towards a shutdown unless Congress reaches a funding deal by midnight on Saturday. The shutdown would begin at 12.01am on Sunday.
Share $What to watch in North America today on X (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in North America today on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in North America today on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 09:21
Putin appoints Wagner commander to lead irregular operations in Ukraine
Max Seddon in Riga
Andrei Troshchev during a meeting with Vladimir Putin on September 28 © MIKHAIL METZEL/KREMLIN/POOL/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock
Vladimir Putin has appointed a former senior Wagner commander to lead Russian irregular operations during the invasion of Ukraine, indicating the Kremlin is looking to repurpose the notorious paramilitary group a month after its founder died in a plane crash.
Putin, Russia’s president, told Andrei Troshchev that he would lead “volunteer units that can fulfil various combat tasks” in Ukraine and elsewhere, according to a transcript on the Kremlin’s website.
Troshchev, best known by his call sign ‘Grey-Hair’, was one of Wagner’s senior leaders for nearly a decade before apparently falling out with its founder, Yevgeny Prigozhin, around the time the former caterer led an aborted mutiny in a march on Moscow in June.
Share $Putin appoints Wagner commander to lead irregular operations in Ukraine on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Putin appoints Wagner commander to lead irregular operations in Ukraine on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Putin appoints Wagner commander to lead irregular operations in Ukraine on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 09:13
Eurozone inflation falls to lowest rate in almost two years
Martin Arnold in Frankfurt
Eurozone inflation has fallen to its lowest rate for almost two years, bolstering hopes that the biggest surge in consumer prices for a generation is fading fast and could allow the European Central Bank to stop raising interest rates.
Consumer prices in the single currency bloc rose 4.3 per cent in the year to September, down from 5.2 per cent in August, according to Eurostat, the EU statistics arm. Economists polled by Reuters had expected a rise of 4.5 per cent.
Core inflation, which excludes energy and food and is closely watched by the ECB as a gauge of underlying price pressures, fell more than expected to 4.5 per cent, down from 5.3 per cent in August.
Share $Eurozone inflation falls to lowest rate in almost two years on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Eurozone inflation falls to lowest rate in almost two years on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Eurozone inflation falls to lowest rate in almost two years on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 08:50
UK mortgage approvals fall to lowest level in six months as interest rates give buyers pause
Valentina Romei in London
UK mortgage approvals fell in August to the lowest level in six months while consumer credit rose, according to data by the Bank of England, reflecting the impact of higher interest rates on the economy.
Figures published on Friday showed that net mortgage approvals for house purchases fell from 49,500 in July to 45,400 in August, while those for remortgaging dropped their lowest level since July 2012, to 25,000 from 39,300.
This comes as the average interest rate on new mortgages rose 16 basis points to 4.82 per cent, the highest since 2008, the data showed.  
Meanwhile, individuals borrowed, on net, an additional £1.6bn in consumer credit in August, up from £1.3bn in July and above the six month average of £1.4bn.
Share $UK mortgage approvals fall to lowest level in six months as interest rates give buyers pause on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK mortgage approvals fall to lowest level in six months as interest rates give buyers pause on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK mortgage approvals fall to lowest level in six months as interest rates give buyers pause on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 08:35
Risers and fallers in Europe
Donato Paolo Mancini in London
Big share price moves in Europe today include German lender Commerzbank, Italian fashion brand Brunello Cucinelli, and British carmaker Aston Martin:
•
Commerzbank: The German lender leads gains on the Europe-wide Stoxx Europe 600 index, adding more than 10 per cent, after announcing shareholder payouts worth €3bn for profits earned over three years.
•
Brunello Cucinelli: Shares surged 7 per cent after Goldman Sachs raised the rating of the Italian luxury group to “buy”.
•
Aston Martin: Shares gained more than 10 per cent after executive chair Lawrence Stroll’s Yew Tree Consortium raised its stake in the company to 26.2 per cent.
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 06:59
French inflation lower than expected in September at 5.6%
Martin Arnold in Frankfurt
Economists had forecast a rise to 5.9 per cent © Bloomberg
French inflation rose at a slower annual pace than expected this month, despite an acceleration of energy prices after government subsidies were reduced in the EU’s second-largest economy.
The national statistics institute said the harmonised index of consumer prices rose 5.6 per cent in the year to September, down from 5.7 per cent in August and below the 5.9 per cent forecast by economists in a Reuters poll.
Inflation across the 20-country bloc is expected to fall to almost a two-year low of 4.5 per cent, down from 5.2 per cent in August, when official figures are released later on Friday, boosting hopes that the European Central Bank has reached the end of its rate-rising cycle.
Share $French inflation lower than expected in September at 5.6% on X (opens in a new window)
Share $French inflation lower than expected in September at 5.6% on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $French inflation lower than expected in September at 5.6% on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 06:34
UK water company Severn Trent to raise £1bn to tackle pollution
Jonathan Wheatley in London
UK water company Severn Trent will raise £1bn through a new share issue to tackle sewage spills and pollution, just months after it received a £1.5mn fine for pollution.
The company said the share issue would raise £500mn from institutional investors, another £500mn from the Qatar Investment Authority and up to £7mn from retail investors. An unspecified number of company directors would buy shares worth £275,000 each.
It said the money would support a five-year, £12.9bn spending plan, including £5bn on “enhancing capacity and service beyond current levels” to cut overflow spills and pollution by 30 per cent each, with a 16 per cent reduction in leakage.
Share $UK water company Severn Trent to raise £1bn to tackle pollution on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK water company Severn Trent to raise £1bn to tackle pollution on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK water company Severn Trent to raise £1bn to tackle pollution on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 06:17
Japan does not have ‘defence line’ against weaker yen, says finance minister
Kana Inagaki in Tokyo
© AFP via Getty Images
Japan has not set up a “defence line” to protect the nation from a weaker yen, according to its finance minister, who added however that he would not rule out any option in addressing sharp currency moves.
“We don’t have a so-called defence line,” Shunichi Suzuki told reporters on Friday. “We focus on the speed of currency moves.” 
Traders remain on alert for an intervention by Japanese authorities with the yen trading near the ¥150 level after Bank of Japan governor Kazuo Ueda downplayed market expectations that the country would lift negative interest rates by the year end.
But Suzuki warned that the yen depreciation has advanced “significantly”, reiterating that he was watching currency markets with a “high sense of urgency”.
Share $Japan does not have ‘defence line’ against weaker yen, says finance minister on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Japan does not have ‘defence line’ against weaker yen, says finance minister on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Japan does not have ‘defence line’ against weaker yen, says finance minister on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 06:16
UK bounced back from pandemic faster than estimated, fresh data shows
Valentina Romei in London
The UK economy has bounced back from the pandemic much faster than previously estimated, according to new official statistics that show Britain is no longer the worst performer among the G7 countries.
In the three months to June, gross domestic output, or GDP, was 1.8 per cent above the pre-pandemic level in Q4 2019, compared with the 0.2 per cent below that level initially estimated, Office for National Statistics data showed on Friday.
GDP is now estimated to have increased by 4.3 per cent in 2022, up from a first estimate of 4.1 per cent. Growth between the first and the second quarter of 2023 was left unrevised at 0.2 per cent.
Before the revision, the UK was the only G7 economy not have recovered to pre-pandemic levels. The amendment gives it a similar performance to France and a stronger rebound than Germany, but weaker than other countries.
Share $UK bounced back from pandemic faster than estimated, fresh data shows on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK bounced back from pandemic faster than estimated, fresh data shows on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK bounced back from pandemic faster than estimated, fresh data shows on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 04:30
What to watch in Europe
Maxine Kelly in London
Eurozone inflation: The bloc’s headline rate is expected to have fallen to an almost two-year low of 4.5 per cent when the flash September figure is released on Friday, down from 5.2 per cent in August.
Germany jobs: The September unemployment rate in Europe’s largest economy is forecast to remain unchanged at 5.7 per cent, according to economists polled by Reuters. 
UK GDP: The Office for National Statistics is to publish revised second-quarter figures. Earlier estimates showed that the economy grew 0.2 per cent between April and June. 
Slovakia elections: Parliamentary voting is to be held on Saturday.
Fans enjoy an aeronautical display during the 2023 Ryder Cup opening ceremony in Rome on Thursday © Getty Images
Ryder Cup: The 44th Ryder Cup golf tournament between Europe and the US concludes in Italy on Sunday.
Conservative conference: The annual party conference, the first since Rishi Sunak succeeded Liz Truss as UK prime minister 12 months ago, begins on Sunday.
Share $What to watch in Europe on X (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in Europe on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in Europe on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 04:08
UK rural land risks being forested over in corporate ‘greenwashing’
Madeleine Speed in London
Oil and gas companies, airlines and car manufacturers are among the biggest users of carbon ‘offsets’, such as tree planting © Adam Burton/Alamy
Agricultural land in England is at risk of being forested over by big conglomerates under the guise of combating climate change, the UK’s farming minister has warned.
Mark Spencer told the Financial Times in an interview that the UK had to take care not to let too much farmland be turned over to tree planting and other carbon offsetting schemes for the sake of corporate “greenwashing”.
“We need to be wary of what we’re using land for and we can’t allow that sort of greenwashing,” said Spencer. “If we’re not careful Shell and British Airways will buy all the land in England and just plant trees on it to offset their carbon [emissions].”
Read more about the threat to agricultural land here.
Share $UK rural land risks being forested over in corporate ‘greenwashing’ on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK rural land risks being forested over in corporate ‘greenwashing’ on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK rural land risks being forested over in corporate ‘greenwashing’ on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 04:07
Vietnam’s GDP growth at 5.33% in third quarter
Gary Jones in London
Vietnam’s economy grew 5.33 per cent in the third quarter from a year earlier, according to data released by the country’s official statistics agency on Friday.
The General Statistics Office cited a recovery in tourism as the main reason for the growth, with the number of overseas visitors in July and August reaching 2.25mn, easily topping the 1.27mn who arrived in the July-September period last year.
The services sector, dominated by tourism and retail, is estimated to account for about 40 per cent of Vietnam’s GDP. The new data suggests, however, that the government’s economic growth target of 6.5 per cent will be missed this year.
Share $Vietnam’s GDP growth at 5.33% in third quarter on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Vietnam’s GDP growth at 5.33% in third quarter on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Vietnam’s GDP growth at 5.33% in third quarter on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 03:00
China tech stocks higher after cross-border data flows announcement
Gloria Li in Hong Kong
Chinese tech stocks jumped on Friday morning, after the country’s top internet regulator released a draft rule simplifying cross-border data transfers. 
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index rose 2 per cent, while the Hang Seng Tech index, a gauge tracking the top 30 technology companies, climbed 2.4 per cent. 
Internet giants Tencent and Alibaba rose 1.8 per cent and 2.5 per cent, respectively, while EV start-ups XPeng and Nio gained 7.1 per cent and 6.7 per cent, respectively. Trading was closed in mainland China for a holiday.
China plans to exempt ordinary activities, such as international trade, academic cooperation and cross-border shopping, from applying for a data security review, according to a statement made by China’s cyberspace administration on Thursday. 
Share $China tech stocks higher after cross-border data flows announcement on X (opens in a new window)
Share $China tech stocks higher after cross-border data flows announcement on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $China tech stocks higher after cross-border data flows announcement on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 29, 01:27
What to watch in Asia
Gloria Li in Hong Kong
Economic data: Japan releases August industrial production and retail sales data on Friday. China is to publish its manufacturing purchasing managers’ index on Saturday.
Maldives election: Saturday’s presidential run-off vote between President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih and opposition candidate Mohamed Muizzu could decide if China or India has the biggest influence on the archipelago nation. 
Indonesian rail: The country plans to begin commercial operations of the first high-speed rail service in south-east Asia on Sunday.
China National Day: The country celebrates the 74th anniversary of the establishment of the People’s Republic on Sunday, starting a week-long holiday.
Markets: Stocks in Tokyo fell on Friday morning, while futures contracts in Hong Kong pointed higher.
Share $What to watch in Asia on X (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in Asia on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in Asia on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 28, 22:49
Tesla’s black workers faced widespread racism, US agency alleges
Taylor Nicole Rogers in New York
The lawsuit is the latest in a series of legal actions over accusations of anti-black racism at Tesla © AP
Elon Musk’s electric-car maker Tesla on Thursday was sued by a US civil rights agency, which accused the company of tolerating “open hostility and racism” directed at black employees.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which enforces federal employment discrimination law, filed a complaint in a California federal court alleging black employees at Tesla’s Fremont assembly plant have since 2015 been subjected to “severe or pervasive racial harassment” in violation of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
The lawsuit from the EEOC is the latest in a series of legal actions over accusations of anti-black racism at the company. A federal jury awarded Owen Diaz, who is black, nearly $3.2mn in damages in April in a lawsuit over the racial abuse he said he experienced while working as an elevator operator at the Fremont factory in 2015.
Read more about the lawsuit here.
Share $Tesla’s black workers faced widespread racism, US agency alleges on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Tesla’s black workers faced widespread racism, US agency alleges on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Tesla’s black workers faced widespread racism, US agency alleges on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 28, 22:46
ESPN nears broadcast deal with Tiger Woods’ golf league
Sara Germano in New York
ESPN is close to finalising a deal on broadcast rights with the emerging golf league TGL, according to people familiar with the matter, giving the upstart pro league helmed by Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy a media partner as they prepare to launch next year.
Terms of the deal, including value and duration, have not yet been finalised, the people said, but are expected to be ironed out in the coming weeks. The first TGL season is expected to begin in January. It was not immediately clear how many of the TGL matches would be broadcast over ESPN’s cable networks or on its proprietary streaming platforms.
A spokesperson for ESPN did not have an immediate comment. A spokesman for TGL said they did not comment on ongoing negotiations.
Read more about the potential deal here.
Share $ESPN nears broadcast deal with Tiger Woods’ golf league on X (opens in a new window)
Share $ESPN nears broadcast deal with Tiger Woods’ golf league on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $ESPN nears broadcast deal with Tiger Woods’ golf league on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 28, 22:45
Mexico’s central bank holds rates steady while keeping ‘hawkish’ stance
Christine Murray in Mexico City
Banxico revised its projection for core inflation in the fourth quarter to 5.3% up from 5.1% © Reuters
The Bank of Mexico on Thursday voted to hold interest rates at 11.25 per cent and lifted its inflation forecasts for this year and the next.
The five-member board voted unanimously to hold rates steady, with most analysts expecting the bank’s first rate cut in early 2024. Banxico revised its projection for core inflation in the fourth quarter to 5.3 per cent, up from 5.1 per cent. 
“Although progress in the disinflation process has been made, the outlook is still very complex,” the board said in a statement. Capital Economics economist Jason Tuvey said the statement was more hawkish than previous comments.
Share $Mexico’s central bank holds rates steady while keeping ‘hawkish’ stance on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Mexico’s central bank holds rates steady while keeping ‘hawkish’ stance on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Mexico’s central bank holds rates steady while keeping ‘hawkish’ stance on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
SEP 28, 22:42
US mortgage rates hit highest level since 2000
Jaren Kerr in New York
US mortgage rates have reached the highest level since 2000, as elevated interest rates and climbing bond yields push up borrowing costs.
The average 30-year fixed-rate mortgage has increased to 7.31 per cent, mortgage lender Freddie Mac said on Thursday, up from 7.19 per cent last week, and the highest level since the third week of December 2000.
Long-term mortgage rates have been above 7 per cent since the third week of August. Federal Reserve officials have repeated the need for interest rates to stay elevated to bring inflation back to the central bank’s 2 per cent target.
Share $US mortgage rates hit highest level since 2000 on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US mortgage rates hit highest level since 2000 on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US mortgage rates hit highest level since 2000 on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
