This article is an on-site version of our Swamp Notes newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter sent straight to your inbox every Monday and Friday
Happy New Year Swampians! We are glad to be back, and buckling in for what will be an eventful, and most likely exhausting, year of coverage — including the biggest election period in human history, two hot wars, more trade frictions and (on the upside) the possibility of a soft landing despite it all. I wanted to start this first Note of 2024 by laying out some political and economic predictions for the next 12 months, letting you know what’s on my coverage radar — and asking for your thoughts about topics you’d like to hear more about. My colleague Peter Spiegel, the head of our US operation, will be my partner this week, sitting in for Ed Luce.
So, let me start with three initial predictions for the coming year: 
1. The rubber hits the road on trade
You might think this is already the case, given the last several years of US-China decoupling. But I think globalisation will continue to be under fire, and we will see new export controls, investment restrictions and a global drive for more national and regional self-sufficiency. This trend will continue, albeit in different forms, no matter who wins the presidential election in November.
It will be driven as much from China as from the US, which needs to spell out what its trade policy in the post-neoliberal era really is. The hoopla over Nippon Steel’s bid for US Steel is a case in point — the administration has been saying we need to make new trade alliances to counter China, but is balking at a bid from a Japanese company. There may be very good reasons for this (like the chance that Nippon would try to put more jobs in the US south’s “right to work” states, which would go against the administration’s pro-union stance). But this draws home the point that the White House needs to start putting meat on the bones of what a “postcolonial” trade paradigm really means. (I’ll come back to this topic in a column soon.) Otherwise, allies will become rightfully concerned about protectionism and xenophobia.
2. The end of corporate virtue signalling
As political consultant Bruce Mehlman put it in his 2024 look-ahead, companies will start focusing on “value, not values” as the blow-up at Harvard and the University of Pennsylvania, coupled with a “woke-lash” against identity politics, pushes corporations away from DEI and towards ROI.
This is, to me, a good thing. As I’ve long argued, companies would be better off focusing on economic metrics than political ones. That doesn’t mean a return to shareholder capitalism but rather a focus on quantitative metrics over qualitative ones. (That doesn’t have to mean less inclusion — I like, for example, the fact that Blackstone is putting its DEI focus on socio-economic diversity).
3. AI goes mainstream
In some ways, it already has — but this year, AI will dominate headlines for more reasons. First, companies are starting to really integrate the technology into existing operations, rather than simply investing in pilot projects. Microsoft is actually adding a new key to its keyboard that allows users to call up their own AI assistant with a strike of the keypad. And of course, AI will play a huge roll in the election news. Already, we’ve seen AI used for voter manipulation by states and private sector actors. Deepfakes will be all over mainstream media, advertising, and of course social platforms.
This will probably exacerbate the decline of trust in all institutions, (Supreme Court, colleges, companies, Congress, etc) which is at record lows — with the notable exception of unions, which are enjoying decades-high public support. That gets to some of the areas I’ll be focused on for the coming year, which include:
•
The continued strength of the labour movement, and whether leaders that have been focused on their individual countries begin to connect the dots globally
•
The new global trade map, supply chains, and the effects on inflation, security, jobs
•
Whether we get a soft landing, or a big economic surprise that shifts consensus
•
Which candidates and economic messages resonate with voters
•
Black swans, grey swans, and the signals we are missing in the noise
I’d love any suggestions on those from readers, and thoughts on what you’d like to see in Swamp Notes in 2024. Peter — over to you for your own predictions for the new year.
Recommended reading
•
 Michelle Cottle had a smart piece in the New York Times opinion section about how young voters think not in terms of parties or even individual candidates, but values and topics. This reminded me of FT colleague Gillian Tett’s idea about the “pick and mix” generation of young people who are used to endless customisation, and choose their politics the same way they select their digital playlists.
•
I don’t usually agree with Tom Friedman, but I thought his commentary entitled “What Is Happening to Our World?,” got the situation in Gaza just about right. Certainly it has important history that anyone following the story (which is pretty much everyone) should understand.
•
 On the books front, I just finished Patrick Radden Keefe’s excellent book on the IRA and the Troubles in Northern Ireland, Say Nothing, which looks at the larger issue through the lens of the abduction and murder of Jean McConville, a mother of 10 who was accused of being an informant to the British government, in 1972. If you are into narrative non-fiction, this is a page turning read — and the big pay-off doesn’t even come until page 407.
•
And in the FT, I thought Martin Sandbu did a great job looking at the evolution of “effective altruism,” the philosophy that drove the folks at FTX. And if you struggle to read long form pieces like this, then have a look at Margaret Heffernan’s argument about why you should keep at it.
Peter Spiegel responds
Rana, you should know by now that within the walls of FT Towers, I’ve become a bit notorious for getting predictions wrong — a distinction I now apparently share with my colleague Rob Armstrong, who did terribly in the FT’s stockpicking contest despite being our leading brain on US financial markets. So I’m going to stick to American foreign policy, the Swampy topic I know best, and counsel that all of these forecasts come with a major health warning. 
First, I’m going to predict that Congress eventually passes the $60bn military aid package for Ukraine. I realise this is a dangerous call, given it relies on a temporary hiatus in the dysfunction gripping the Republican-controlled House. But the consequences of not agreeing to the funding are so dire that at some point most on both sides of the aisle will come to their senses.
Second, despite the political hit Biden is taking right now within his own party for his ardent support of Israel, it will not impact his re-election efforts. Although there are fears the young Democratic shock troops that do much of the ground game in presidential campaigns will absent themselves in November, US foreign policy very rarely impacts presidential politics. For good or for ill, by Election Day the conflict with Hamas will have been overtaken by other events. 
Finally, despite an expected increase in rhetorical attacks on China that have become routine in presidential election years, relations between Washington and Beijing will actually continue to thaw. This is largely because both countries are now operating from a position of weakness — the US because it is dealing with crises in Ukraine and Israel and can’t afford another escalation elsewhere, and China because its post-pandemic economy continues to underperform and needs detente with the west to raise confidence and foreign capital flows.
Your feedback
And now a word from our Swampians . . .
In response to “Is Bidenomics dead on arrival?”:
“While the economic discomfort being felt by the American voter blinds them to the value of Bidenomics, the value of it needs to be communicated in the manner Rana articulates in her penultimate paragraph and needs to be appreciated by the voters in America. Off the top of my head, I’d suggest Bidenomics is replaced with Humanomics, and then campaigning that makes clear the humanity In Biden’s economic policies. The courage he shows in implementing long-term economic changes that will benefit the children and grandchildren of today’s voters will be appreciated by the many voters who anguish about the world they are leaving [behind]. However, to Rana’s point, the people who care about this are not getting the message. That needs to change.” — Mel Gardner
Your feedback
We'd love to hear from you. You can email the team on swampnotes@ft.com, contact Peter Spiegel on peter.spiegel@ft.com and Rana on rana.foroohar@ft.com, and follow them on X at @RanaForoohar and @SpiegelPeter. We may feature an excerpt of your response in the next newsletter
Recommended newsletters for you
Unhedged — Robert Armstrong dissects the most important market trends and discusses how Wall Street’s best minds respond to them. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex is the FT’s incisive daily column on investment. Local and global trends from expert writers in four great financial centres. Sign up here
