It’s tough to get excited about US stocks right now. But someone is trying to at least!
The S&P 500 is trading at 22 times its earnings for the past 12 months, and 19 times earnings forecasts for the next twelve, via FactSet. That’s not super high, but it’s still above its average of 18 over the past two decades.
So there’s plenty of caution on Wall Street. Goldman Sachs is predicting the index will rise to 4700, up 3.3 per cent from Monday’s close. Morgan Stanley was even more cautious, with a year-end forecast of 4500. Strategists from Bank of America and RBC have predicted record highs, but those highs are about 9.9 per cent above their current levels.
The most bullish of the bunch has been Deutsche Bank’s Binky Chadha, who’s calling for the US large-cap index to end the year at 5100, above the recent forecasts for 5000 from BofA and RBC. Chadha’s forecast would require the S&P 500 to rise 12 per cent from Monday’s close.
A 12-per-cent rally isn’t exactly a standout compared to recent years of stock-market performance. The S&P 500 is on track for a 19-per-cent rise this year, for example, after rallying 27 per cent in 2021.
Still, given the circumstances, predicting a double-digit rise to new highs sounds optimistic, especially because Deutsche Bank’s house view calls for a “mild short US recession”.
Chadha thinks investors are simply too pessimistic, thanks to worries about the macroeconomic outlook. His emphasis below:
Solid fundamentals, poor perceptions
Equity markets remain intensely focused on what is a fluid macro outlook. For over a year, the economist consensus has steadfastly called for a sharp slowing in US growth, even as personal consumption, the largest component of spending, has grown in a trend-like manner; and lending standards, a key channel for the transmission of higher rates, surprisingly eased last quarter. The repeated rolling forward of the timing of macro slowing has kept the bar for growth surprises low. Despite above-trend growth, core inflation has fallen, driven by steep declines in the unexplained component (besides unemployment and the dollar) as factors idiosyncratic to the pandemic recovery eased. Continued declines would return inflation to its pre-pandemic range without requiring slower growth. The 1970s inflation experience and the Fed’s past reaction function however suggest no rate cuts unless recession materializes.
His call seems to be primarily about earnings. This is sensible, because the largest companies’ profits have been shown to be remarkably resilient throughout different economic conditions.
Chadha argues that the “earnings recession” is already past us, after a decline in S&P 500 profits in the second half of 2022. FactSet’s data shows per-share earnings declining in 4Q22, 1Q23 and 2Q23, but still with a clear rebound in the third quarter.
And profits are expected to rise to new highs this year even after the early-year dip, according to FactSet. Chadha explains:
Earnings growing solidly, though perceptions remain poor. S&P 500 EPS fell in H2 2022, bottoming in Q4, then grew solidly in 2023 to reach a new high by Q3. Perceptions though remain poor, tied to still low yoy (year-on-year) growth, the level of LTM (last twelve months) earnings and low corporate visibility on the macro outlook. This may change with Q4 reporting when yoy growth is set to approach 10%. For 2024, the house economics view with a mild short US recession implies $250 (+10% growth). If instead we get a trend like 2% GDP growth, which was exceeded in each of the last 5 quarters, we see EPS of $271 (+19%).
Are valuations high? We don’t think so. If inflation returns to 2%, as economists forecast and is priced in across asset classes, while payout ratios remain elevated, fair value in our reading is 18x, with a range of 16x-20x, which they have been in for the last 2 years. If earnings growth continues to recover as we forecast, valuations will remain well supported around the top of the range as is typical on the pricing in of a pickup in earnings growth.
Setting 2024 year-end S&P 500 target 5100. Our base case for EPS remains $250, but it incorporates a mild short recession whose timing has been rolled forward. Allowing for some continued roll forward, we set a target of 5100 for year-end 2024; in our upside scenario, EPS of $271 should see the multiple expand some, so S&P 500 at 5500. We note that the S&P 500 has been in a clear trend up channel since the GFC. After falling below last year, the rally in the first half this year took it back up to the bottom and it has been muddling along at the lower end since. A continued muddle through along the bottom implies 5300 by end 2024, while a move to the middle to 6000. By comparison, our base case target of 5100 and even the upside scenario of 5500 look conservative.
Chadha cites a handful of reasons for optimism, and a few are . . . interesting. First, he thinks there will be a “muted” sell-off around the “widely anticipated”, “mild and short” recession. Fair enough! Second, the end of the presidential election (ugh) could spark a relief rally.
And third, the tight labour markets and rising wages could spark a boom in productivity. Apparently because companies will use AI instead of hiring more people ha ha ha ugh lol.
From Chadha:
We see a number of catalysts that will shape the trajectory:
- Near term, there were 3 drivers of the recent correction. In August, a garden variety 3-5% pullback that is typical every 2-3 months and was overdue; another bout of rates vol around the September high-for-longer FOMC and Treasury supply concerns; and in October geopolitical risks and events, with the market looking to be closely following the historical playbook of sharp short-lived selloffs and quick recoveries.
- Rates versus rates vol. Over the last 2 years, equity selloffs around moves in rates reflected higher rates vol rather than the higher level of rates, with equities rallying as vol inevitably came off.
- Expect muted sell-off around slowdown/recession. As we have argued, given that it is widely anticipated, and expected to be mild and short, we see only a modest short-lived sell-off.
- Presidential election. An often-observed pattern has been the buying of protection approaching close elections that saw equities go sideways or pull back, rallying in the aftermath regardless of which party won as protection was either cashed in or rolled off.
- Large potential upside risk from tight labor markets. Tight labor markets as have prevailed for over 2 years, not only in the US but also in other developed and emerging markets, have historically been a precursor to phases of rapid productivity (and output) growth as they incentivize companies to save on labor and adopt new technologies, such as generative AI.
Anyway, he is “neutral” on Big Tech and the magnificent seven, which are priced, uh, magnificently. The team is bullish on consumer stocks and banks, which “are already priced for a recession”. Materials stocks get a nod too, since they should benefit if the dollar weakens (from weaker economic growth and/or rate cuts) and growth picks up. Defensive recession-safe stocks — usually utilities and other bond proxies — won’t get the nod until bond yields turn lower, presumably when the Fed starts cutting:
Across sectors. We remain neutral megacap growth & Tech as superior relative earnings growth is already reflected in very elevated valuations. We remain overweight the Financials as well as the Consumer Cyclicals as they are already priced for a recession and the biggest beneficiary of an eventual recovery. We turn overweight Materials on a growth up- and dollar-down cycle. We remain neutral on the Industrials as they have already been boosted by industrial policy. Remain neutral on Energy as oil prices remain well above our measure of fair value, while questions remain around energy transition policy, the oil-dollar cycle and sustainability of their financial discipline. We remain underweight the Defensives until recession fears are accompanied by falling bond yields.
In other words, Deutsche Bank will be bullish, but only because you’re all too bearish.
