JAN 03, 15:38
US job openings fall to lowest level in more than 2 years in November
Taylor Nicole Rogers in Chattanooga
US job openings fell to their lowest level in more than two years in November, fuelling expectations that the Federal Reserve would start cutting interest rates as the labour market shows signs of cooling.
JAN 03, 22:20
Donald Trump asks US Supreme Court to intervene in Colorado ballot dispute
Lauren Fedor in Washington
Donald Trump has asked the US Supreme Court to overturn a decision to ban him from Colorado’s presidential primary ballot.
The former president’s lawyers on Wednesday filed a petition against the ruling, setting the stage for the nation’s highest court to decide whether states can stop him from seeking higher office for his role in the January 6 attack on the US Capitol.
Colorado’s supreme court ruled last month to disqualify Trump from the state’s presidential primary ballot, saying he was not fit to be president under the 14th Amendment to the US constitution, which prohibits officers who have engaged in insurrection or rebellion from holding office.
Share $Donald Trump asks US Supreme Court to intervene in Colorado ballot dispute on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Donald Trump asks US Supreme Court to intervene in Colorado ballot dispute on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Donald Trump asks US Supreme Court to intervene in Colorado ballot dispute on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
JAN 03, 21:19
US stocks close lower after release of Fed minutes
Harriet Clarfelt in New York
US stocks closed lower on Wednesday, extending their declines following the release of the FOMC minutes from December’s meeting.
The S&P 500 lost 0.8 per cent, while the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite fell 1.2 per cent, notching its worst two-day start to the year since 2005.
In government bond markets, the yield on the policy-sensitive two-year Treasury yield was flat at 4.33 per cent. The benchmark 10-year Treasury yield edged 0.03 percentage points lower to 3.91 per cent. Bond yields fall as their prices rise.
Share $US stocks close lower after release of Fed minutes on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks close lower after release of Fed minutes on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks close lower after release of Fed minutes on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 21:01
US officials say SpaceX illegally fired workers critical of Musk
Taylor Nicole Rogers in Chattanooga
© REUTERS
US labour officials accused Elon Musk’s satellite maker SpaceX of illegally firing eight employees who criticised the billionaire chief executive.
The National Labour Relations Board, which enforces collective bargaining laws, said on Wednesday that the employees were fired after writing and circulating an open letter calling Musk “a frequent source of distraction and embarrassment” in 2022.
The NLRB said it would seek a settlement with SpaceX before a scheduled court hearing in March.
In August, the Justice Department filed a lawsuit filed against SpaceX, accusing it of discriminating against asylum seekers and refugees in hiring.
Share $US officials say SpaceX illegally fired workers critical of Musk on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US officials say SpaceX illegally fired workers critical of Musk on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US officials say SpaceX illegally fired workers critical of Musk on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 20:34
BP and Equinor scrap New York offshore wind contract as costs rise
Myles McCormick in Houston
BP and Equinor reached a deal to scrap a contract to sell energy from a planned offshore wind power project to the state of New York, the latest such venture to be knocked off course by worsening industry economics.
The two Europe-based energy majors on Wednesday said authorities in the US state had allowed them to “reset” a 2022 arrangement to deliver power from their unbuilt 1.26-gigawatt Empire Wind 2 project “in anticipation of new offtake opportunities”.
A combination of higher costs and interest rates and supply disruptions has thwarted the business models of many offshore wind power projects in the US, setting back ambitious visions for the clean energy technology from the Biden administration and several coastal states.
Read more here
Share $BP and Equinor scrap New York offshore wind contract as costs rise on X (opens in a new window)
Share $BP and Equinor scrap New York offshore wind contract as costs rise on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $BP and Equinor scrap New York offshore wind contract as costs rise on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 19:51
Oil price surges as Middle East tensions mount
Jaren Kerr in New York
Oil prices surged on Wednesday amid escalating tensions in the Middle East, raising concerns that the conflict between Israel and Hamas could spread throughout the region and disrupt supply.
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, settled 3.1 per cent higher at $78.25 a barrel, while US marker West Texas Intermediate gained 3.3 per cent to $72.70 a barrel.
Iran on Wednesday vowed retribution for two bomb blasts that killed at least 95 people at a ceremony commemorating a military commander assassinated by the US in 2020.
Share $Oil price surges as Middle East tensions mount on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Oil price surges as Middle East tensions mount on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Oil price surges as Middle East tensions mount on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 19:20
US stocks extend losses after release of Fed minutes
Harriet Clarfelt and Jaren Kerr in New York
Declines in US stock indices accelerated on Wednesday as traders considered minutes from the Federal Reserve’s December meeting, which indicated that monetary policy could remain in restrictive territory “for some time”.
In equity markets, the S&P 500 slightly extended an earlier declines to trade 0.7 per cent lower. The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite index was down 1 per cent.
US government bonds were subdued. The benchmark 10-year yield traded 0.01 percentage points lower at 3.93 per cent, while the policy-sensitive two-year yield, which closely tracks interest rate expectations, edged 0.02 percentage points higher to 4.35 per cent. Bond yields rise as their prices fall.
Futures markets continued to price in roughly six interest rate cuts for 2024, despite the Fed’s official “dot plot” projections indicating just three cuts.
Share $US stocks extend losses after release of Fed minutes on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks extend losses after release of Fed minutes on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks extend losses after release of Fed minutes on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 19:19
Fed officials say rates could remain high ‘for some time’
Claire Jones in Washington and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Most Federal Reserve officials want to keep borrowing costs high “for some time”, adding to doubts that the US central bank is poised to begin cutting interest rates as early as March.
Officials expressed growing optimism that Fed was succeeding in its quest to quell inflation, according to the minutes, but were careful not to commit to an immediate loosening of monetary policy.
Minutes from the December meeting, when officials surprised markets by indicating they expected the bank to cut by a quarter point three times over the course of this year, showed that while most rate-setters expected to cut this year, there was “an unusually elevated degree of uncertainty” in the outlook for the economy.
Share $Fed officials say rates could remain high ‘for some time’ on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Fed officials say rates could remain high ‘for some time’ on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Fed officials say rates could remain high ‘for some time’ on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 18:28
US and 11 other countries condemn Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping
John Paul Rathbone in London
The US and 11 other countries condemned attacks by Houthi rebels on commercial shipping in the Red Sea and warned the militant group of potentially severe consequences if their attacks continued.

“We call for the immediate end of these illegal attacks and release of unlawfully detained vessels and crews,” said a statement issued by the US, alongside Australia, Bahrain, Belgium, the UK, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands and New Zealand.

“The Houthis will bear the responsibility of the consequences should they continue to threaten lives, the global economy, and free flow of commerce in the region’s critical waterways,” it added.

The statement came as oil prices rise and Houthi rebels claimed another attack on a merchant vessel in the Red Sea, which handles nearly 15 per cent of global seaborne trade.
Share $US and 11 other countries condemn Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US and 11 other countries condemn Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US and 11 other countries condemn Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 17:43
Argentine court blocks loosened labour laws decreed by Milei
Ciara Nugent in Buenos Aires
A court in Argentina has suspended the relaxation of labour laws decreed by president Javier Milei, in the first stumbling block for the libertarian economist’s ambitious reform agenda.
Argentina’s national labour court ruled on Wednesday that the changes should not take effect while the case was assessed by the judiciary. A complaint filed by the General Confederation of Labour, a powerful labour union, had argued that making the changes via decree was unconstitutional.
Argentina
Argentina’s Javier Milei presents wide-ranging reform legislation to Congress
The labour law revisions, which were part of a sweeping presidential decree to deregulate the economy, include reduced employee severance packages and probationary period extensions. Under Argentine law, Milei’s overall decree will stay in place unless both houses of the country’s congress vote to reject it.
Share $Argentine court blocks loosened labour laws decreed by Milei on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Argentine court blocks loosened labour laws decreed by Milei on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Argentine court blocks loosened labour laws decreed by Milei on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 17:40
Russia and Ukraine exchange prisoners in UAE-brokered deal
Anastasia Stognei in Riga 
Russia and Ukraine exchanged more than 200 military personnel each as part of the UAE-brokered deal, marking the first major prisoner swap since last August.
The Russian Defense Ministry confirmed on Wednesday that 248 Russian soldiers had been repatriated after “a complicated negotiation process”.
Dmytro Lubinets, Ukraine’s humanitarian ombudsman, announced the return of 230 of its soldiers, including those who had defended the Azovstal plant and Zmiiny Island in the early stages of the full-scale war.
Lubinets added that the deal marked the 49th exchange between the two sides.
Share $Russia and Ukraine exchange prisoners in UAE-brokered deal on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Russia and Ukraine exchange prisoners in UAE-brokered deal on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Russia and Ukraine exchange prisoners in UAE-brokered deal on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 16:57
UK stats watchdog probes government claims on legacy backlog asylum cases
Lucy Fisher in London
The UK statistics watchdog is investigating the government’s claim to have “cleared” the so-called legacy backlog of asylum cases.
Prime minister Rishi Sunak announced on New Year’s Day that he had met his pledge to process, by the end of last year, all 92,000 asylum cases that were outstanding up to late June 2022, which he had defined as the “legacy” backlog.
Labour insisted it was a false claim, arguing that more than 4,000 of those cases remained unresolved and highlighting that 17,000 asylum seekers had been withdrawn from the list. 
The Office for Statistics Regulation told the Financial Times it would examine the presentation and communication of all the data in the government’s statistical and press releases on Monday.
The government was contacted for comment.
Share $UK stats watchdog probes government claims on legacy backlog asylum cases on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK stats watchdog probes government claims on legacy backlog asylum cases on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK stats watchdog probes government claims on legacy backlog asylum cases on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 16:36
European stocks dip as investors take profits
George Steer in London
European stocks slipped on Wednesday, extending a weak start to the year as investors took profits after a strong market rally over the final quarter of 2023. 
The region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.9 per cent, with consumer cyclicals and basic materials the worst-performing sectors.
France’s CAC 40 shed 1.7 per cent and Germany’s Dax lost 1.5 per cent. London’s FTSE 100 ended the day 0.5 per cent lower. 
Share $European stocks dip as investors take profits on X (opens in a new window)
Share $European stocks dip as investors take profits on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $European stocks dip as investors take profits on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 15:59
10-year Treasury yields rise above 4% ahead of Fed minutes
Jennifer Hughes in New York
Yields on 10-year Treasuries have risen above 4 per cent for the first time since the US Federal Reserve’s pivotal December meeting as investors awaited publication of its minutes.
Bond prices have started 2024 on the back foot following a strong year-end rally that pushed the benchmark 10-year yield as low 3.78 per cent last week, spurred by an unexpectedly dovish tone from the Fed at its December 13 meeting.
On Wednesday the yield reached 4.008 per cent after Richmond Fed president Thomas Barkin did not rule out further rate rises because of continued inflation risks.
The December meeting minutes will be released at 2pm Eastern Time.
News in-depthUS politics & policy
Federal Reserve lends credence to Joe Biden’s promise of a soft landing for the US economy
Share $10-year Treasury yields rise above 4% ahead of Fed minutes on X (opens in a new window)
Share $10-year Treasury yields rise above 4% ahead of Fed minutes on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $10-year Treasury yields rise above 4% ahead of Fed minutes on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 15:45
US manufacturing sector decline slows in December
Alexandra White in New York
The US manufacturing sector contracted for the 14th consecutive month in December but the pace of the decline slowed.
The Institute for Supply Management said its index tracking factory activity increased to a reading of 47.4 last month from 46.7 in November, just ahead of economists expectations of a reading of 47.1. A figure below 50 indicates that the sector is contracting. 
Although demand has remained soft, production stabilised as employers manage weak demand for new orders. Prices for raw materials decreased in December at a faster pace than the previous month, but companies still reported job cuts and a continued slowdown in hiring.
Share $US manufacturing sector decline slows in December on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US manufacturing sector decline slows in December on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US manufacturing sector decline slows in December on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 15:31
Oil prices rise as container ships avoid Red Sea amid attack fears
George Steer in London
Oil prices jumped more than 2 per cent on Wednesday as the threat of Houthi rebel attacks on container ships in the Red Sea continued to roil commodity markets. 
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, added 2.6 per cent to $77.97 a barrel, while WTI, the US equivalent, rose 2.9 per cent to $72.38 a barrel.
The moves come as major container shipping companies continue to avoid the Red Sea, and following explosions on Wednesday in Kerman, south Iran, which reportedly killed more than 100 people.  
Share $Oil prices rise as container ships avoid Red Sea amid attack fears on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Oil prices rise as container ships avoid Red Sea amid attack fears on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Oil prices rise as container ships avoid Red Sea amid attack fears on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 15:09
Richmond Fed president warns over firms’ plans to raise prices
Claire Jones in Washington
Richmond Federal Reserve president Thomas Barkin has warned that many businesses’ plans to raise their prices aggressively could derail US rate-setters’ efforts to achieve a soft landing for the economy.
Barkin, a voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee this year, said companies’ expectations of steep price rises was one of four big risks to a soft landing. If realised, this would see officials hitting their 2 per cent inflation target with minimal damage to the US economy.
Another risk was that consumer spending remained too strong. Furthermore, either the Fed’s rate rises since 2022 or geopolitical risks could wipe out growth.
“A soft landing is increasingly conceivable,” Barkin said in a speech in Raleigh, North Carolina. “But in no way inevitable.”
Share $Richmond Fed president warns over firms’ plans to raise prices on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Richmond Fed president warns over firms’ plans to raise prices on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Richmond Fed president warns over firms’ plans to raise prices on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 14:50
US stocks fall further as investors await steer from Fed
George Steer in London
US stocks slipped early on Wednesday as investors await the publication of minutes from the Federal Open Market Committee’s December meeting.
Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 index lost 0.5 per cent, having dipped 0.6 per cent on Tuesday, while the tech-dominated Nasdaq Composite fell 0.7 per cent after Monday’s 1.7 per cent decline.
Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell’s decision last month to hint at interest rate cuts in early 2024 sent stocks surging, leaving the S&P 500 close to an all-time high. Stock markets have sold off this year as investors have taken profits following the last quarter’s gains.
December’s minutes will provide a further glimpse of how the US central bank expects rates to move over the coming months.
Share $US stocks fall further as investors await steer from Fed on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks fall further as investors await steer from Fed on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks fall further as investors await steer from Fed on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 13:20
Iran says blasts near military commander’s grave kill more than 100
Najmeh Bozorgmehr in Tehran 
Your device appears to be offline. Reconnect to the internet to view.
The explosions went off in Kerman as people gathered to commemorate former Revolutionary Guards commander Qassem Soleimani
Video description
The explosions went off in Kerman as people gathered to commemorate former Revolutionary Guards commander Qassem Soleimani
Iran said two “terrorist attacks” killed more than 100 people near a commander’s grave on Wednesday, according to reports by state media.
Two explosions in the southern city of Kerman hit crowds gathering to commemorate the fourth anniversary of the US killing of Qassem Soleimani, a former Revolutionary Guards commander.
Iranian officials quoted by state television said the blasts killed 103 people and injured 171, making it the biggest attack in the Islamic republic in years.
The blasts came amid high tensions across the Middle East triggered by Hamas’s October 7 attack on southern Israel and the Jewish state’s offensive in Gaza.
Read more here
Share $Iran says blasts near military commander’s grave kill more than 100 on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Iran says blasts near military commander’s grave kill more than 100 on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Iran says blasts near military commander’s grave kill more than 100 on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 12:26
US mortgage rates end 2023 more than 1 percentage point below October peak
Steff Chávez in Chicago
US mortgage rates ended 2023 more than 1 percentage point below their recent peak, buoying the domestic housing market going into the new year.
6.76%
Average US 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, end of 2023
The 30-year fixed-rate mortgage ended 2023 at 6.76 per cent, down from the 7.9 per cent hit in October, the Mortgage Bankers Association said on Wednesday.
“The recent decline in rates has given the housing market some cause for optimism going into 2024,” said MBA chief economist Joel Kan. There has been “a limited supply of homes for sale”, he added, “but recent strength in new residential construction will continue to help ease inventory shortages”.
However, mortgage applications have not picked up in response to lower rates, ending 2023 down 12 per cent from a year earlier.
Share $US mortgage rates end 2023 more than 1 percentage point below October peak on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US mortgage rates end 2023 more than 1 percentage point below October peak on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US mortgage rates end 2023 more than 1 percentage point below October peak on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 12:04
Luxury stocks pull European equities lower as analysts predict softer earnings
Stephanie Stacey in London
European equities sank lower on Wednesday, with steep declines for luxury stocks after UBS analysts warned of a “weak earnings season” for the sector. 
The region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 was down 0.9 per cent, while the sector-specific Stoxx Luxury 10 fell 2.3 per cent. France’s luxury-heavy Cac 40 dropped 1.4 per cent, pulled lower by sharp falls for index heavyweights LVMH and Kering, which own brands including Christian Dior and Gucci. 
Emmanuel Cau, Barclays’ head of European equity strategy, said the declines were largely due to renewed concerns about a persistently weak Chinese economy, a major market for luxury goods.
Share $Luxury stocks pull European equities lower as analysts predict softer earnings on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Luxury stocks pull European equities lower as analysts predict softer earnings on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Luxury stocks pull European equities lower as analysts predict softer earnings on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 11:50
Striking UK doctors signal willingness to compromise on pay
Laura Hughes in London
Union leaders have indicated junior doctors are willing to accept that their demand for a 35 per cent pay rise could span “a number of years”, in an apparent concession at the start of an unprecedented six-day strike.
Junior doctors in England walked out at 7am on Wednesday in a significant escalation of their battle over pay.
However, Vivek Trivedi, co-chair of the British Medical Association junior doctors committee, appeared to signal a willingness to compromise.
“We’re not asking for any . . . pay restoration to happen overnight”, he told the BBC. “We’re not even saying it has to happen in one year.”
But he said any deal must begin the restoration of junior doctors’ real-terms pay and not further its erosion.
Share $Striking UK doctors signal willingness to compromise on pay on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Striking UK doctors signal willingness to compromise on pay on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Striking UK doctors signal willingness to compromise on pay on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 11:17
Walt Disney signs ‘information-sharing’ deal withValueAct
Oliver Ralph in London
The Walt Disney Company has signed a deal with investor ValueAct Capital, ahead of a battle over the entertainment company’s future expected later this year.
In a statement on Wednesday, Disney said it had entered an “information-sharing” agreement with ValueAct, which is a shareholder in the company, and would consult with the investment firm on “strategic matters”.
“ValueAct Capital has a track record of collaboration and cooperation with the companies it invests in, and its co-CEO Mason Morfit has been very constructive in the conversations we’ve had over the past year,” said Disney chief executive Bob Iger.

Activist hedge fund Trian Partners plans to nominate two candidates to Disney’s board this year, intensifying a campaign against the media group.
Walt Disney Co
Nelson Peltz enlists former Disney executive for proxy battle with Bob Iger
Share $Walt Disney signs ‘information-sharing’ deal withValueAct on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Walt Disney signs ‘information-sharing’ deal withValueAct on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Walt Disney signs ‘information-sharing’ deal withValueAct on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 10:54
What to watch in North America today
Steff Chávez in Chicago
Fed: The US Federal Reserve will release the minutes of its December meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, where rate setters decided to keep interest rates at their 22-year high but signalled cuts in 2024. The Fed has since tried to temper expectations of how imminent those cuts are.
Separately, Richmond Fed president Thomas Barkin will speak on the economic outlook at an event in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Job openings: Economists expect US job openings, a proxy for labour demand, to have declined to 8.85mn in November from 8.73mn in October, indicating a cooling employment market.
US manufacturing: The Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing purchasing manager’s index is forecast to have inched up to a reading of 47.1 in December from 46.7 in November, keeping the sector within contraction territory.
Share $What to watch in North America today on X (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in North America today on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in North America today on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 10:42
Lib Dems call for return of act that would force UK election on May 2
Anna Gross in London
© Getty Images
Liberal Democrats leader Sir Ed Davey is attempting to force a UK general election in May by calling for a return of the Fixed Term Parliament Act, which the Conservatives scrapped in 2022 after introducing it 11 years earlier.
The bill will call for the election to be held in line with the act on May 2, “the first Thursday in May in the fifth calendar year following that in which the polling day for the previous parliamentary general election fell”. 
“It shouldn’t be up to Rishi Sunak to cling on for another 12 months, desperately hoping for something to turn up and causing even more damage,” said Davey, during a Lib Dem rally in Guildford on Wednesday.
Share $Lib Dems call for return of act that would force UK election on May 2 on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Lib Dems call for return of act that would force UK election on May 2 on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Lib Dems call for return of act that would force UK election on May 2 on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 10:33
US Treasuries continue to sell off on interest rate bets
Stephanie Stacey in London
US Treasuries continued to sell off on Wednesday as traders pared bets on interest rate cuts ahead of a busy week of economic data, which could shape the Federal Reserve’s outlook for monetary policy.
Benchmark 10-year Treasury yields rose 0.03 percentage points to 3.97 per cent, after climbing 0.08 percentage points on Tuesday. Rate-sensitive two-year Treasury yields rose 0.02 percentage points to 4.35 per cent. Yields move inversely to prices.
The moves mark a retreat from the broad-based rally last November and December, which came as investors grew increasingly confident that central banks had finished their aggressive rate-hiking campaigns.
Share $US Treasuries continue to sell off on interest rate bets on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US Treasuries continue to sell off on interest rate bets on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US Treasuries continue to sell off on interest rate bets on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 10:09
EU puts Russian state diamond miner on sanctions list in bid to cut Moscow revenues
Anastasia Stognei in Riga
The EU has added Russia’s state-owned Alrosa, the world’s largest diamond miner, to its sanctions list along with the company’s chief executive Pavel Marinychev.
The European Council said the move was part of an effort by the G7 group of rich nations to develop an internationally co-ordinated diamond ban to deprive Russia of an important source of revenues. It said Alrosa accounted for more than 90 per cent of Russian diamond production.
It said EU sanctions in response to Russia’s attack on Ukraine now apply to almost 1,950 individuals and entities.
Both Alrosa and Marinychev are also subject to US sanctions.
Share $EU puts Russian state diamond miner on sanctions list in bid to cut Moscow revenues on X (opens in a new window)
Share $EU puts Russian state diamond miner on sanctions list in bid to cut Moscow revenues on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $EU puts Russian state diamond miner on sanctions list in bid to cut Moscow revenues on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 09:36
Risers and fallers in Europe
Jonathan Wheatley in London
Big share price moves in Europe this morning include Swiss pharmaceutical group Novartis, London-listed betting group Entain and French maker of rail infrastructure Alstom.
•
Novartis: shares were up 3.7 per cent after it announced a strategic partnership with Voyager Therapeutics of the US and broker Jefferies raised its target price.
•
Entain: shares in the troubled owner of Ladbrokes were up 1.5 per cent after activist investor Ricky Sandler was appointed as a non-executive director.
•
Alstom: shares lost more than 6 per cent after Barclays cut its target price.
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 08:33
UK grocery price inflation falls at fastest rate on record, research finds
Valentina Romei in London
UK grocery price inflation declined at the fastest pace on record in December, helping to boost Christmas spending according to the research company Kantar.
Grocery price inflation fell to 6.7 per cent in December from 9.1 per cent in November, marking the fastest month-on-month drop that Kantar has recorded since it started tracking prices in 2008, figures published on Wednesday showed.
Fraser McKevitt, head of retail and consumer insight at Kantar, attributed the decline to promotions being “central” to retailers’ strategy.
He added that lower inflation helped boost transactions, which were the highest since December 2019. The average household spending also rose to an all-time high of £477, according to Kantar.
Share $UK grocery price inflation falls at fastest rate on record, research finds on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK grocery price inflation falls at fastest rate on record, research finds on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK grocery price inflation falls at fastest rate on record, research finds on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 08:29
European equities open higher
Stephanie Stacey in London
European equities opened higher on Wednesday as investors await further clues on the outlook for monetary policy, after they partially unwound bullish bets on interest rate cuts on Tuesday.
The region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 was up 0.2 per cent in early trading. France’s Cac 40 was flat, Germany’s Dax gained 0.1 per cent, and London’s FTSE 100 added 0.3 per cent.
Contracts tracking Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite were flat ahead of the New York open. Both indices declined on Tuesday as traders moderated their expectations for interest rate cuts from the US Federal Reserve.
Share $European equities open higher on X (opens in a new window)
Share $European equities open higher on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $European equities open higher on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 08:25
UK accounting watchdog launches probe at bankrupt local authority
Simon Foy in London
The UK’s accounting watchdog is investigating the conduct of an accountant regarding the operations and investment activities of Thurrock council, which has declared effective bankruptcy.
The Financial Reporting Council said the probe related to the “conduct of a member in relation to compliance with governance, reporting, regulations and professional standards” regarding the Conservative-led local authority’s activities in the four years to March 31, 2022.
Thurrock council in Essex is among the most indebted in the UK, with borrowings of £1.3bn. In 2022, it said it faced losses of £275mn of public money from its investments, mostly in solar energy. Last June, government inspectors said the scale of losses facing Thurrock as a result of failed investments “undermined its financial viability”.
UK local government finance
Failed investments threaten ‘financial viability’ of UK council
Share $UK accounting watchdog launches probe at bankrupt local authority on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK accounting watchdog launches probe at bankrupt local authority on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK accounting watchdog launches probe at bankrupt local authority on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 07:57
Turkish inflation jumps to 64.77% in December
Ayla Jean Yackley in Istanbul
Rising food, transportation and services prices pushed annual inflation in Turkey to 64.77 per cent in December, its highest level in a year, official data showed on Wednesday.
The figure, up from 62 per cent in November, was in line with estimates. Core inflation rose less, from 69.9 per cent year-on-year in November to 70.6 per cent.
Since winning re-election in May, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president has allowed the central bank to raise interest rates by 34 percentage points to tackle rising prices. The next interest-rate-setting meeting is on January 25.
In December, restaurant and hotel prices nearly doubled year-on-year, while food prices rose 72 per cent and transportation costs climbed 77 per cent, the Turkish Statistical Institute said.
Share $Turkish inflation jumps to 64.77% in December on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Turkish inflation jumps to 64.77% in December on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Turkish inflation jumps to 64.77% in December on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 07:21
Airbus offers up to €1.8bn for Atos cyber security business
Sylvia Pfeifer in London
Airbus has made an indicative offer worth up to €1.8bn for the cyber security business of Atos, as the French IT services group seeks to reduce its debt burden.
Airbus confirmed on Wednesday that it was in early stage talks to buy the unit. The aerospace group said that the acquisition could “significantly accelerate” its “digital transformation . . .[and] enhance the company’s defence and security portfolio with strong capabilities in cyber, advanced computing and artificial intelligence”.
Atos said the offer was in the range of €1.5bn-€1.8bn. It said it had received two indicative offers for the unit but one was only for part of it. It did not disclose the identity of the other interested party.
Atos SE
Airbus works on offer worth up to €1.8bn for Atos cyber security unit
Share $Airbus offers up to €1.8bn for Atos cyber security business on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Airbus offers up to €1.8bn for Atos cyber security business on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Airbus offers up to €1.8bn for Atos cyber security business on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 06:08
Chinese EV stocks fall as competition puts pressure on carmakers
FT reporters
Chinese electric vehicle shares lost ground on Wednesday despite carmakers posting mostly strong delivery numbers this week as competition puts pressure on margins.
Hong Kong-listed Great Wall Motor shed more than 5 per cent, while Xpeng dropped more than 3 per cent.
Li Auto retreated 2.2 per cent, and market leader BYD lost 0.3 per cent. Nasdaq-listed Nio fell more than 7 per cent on Tuesday.
Lorraine Tam, head of Asia equity research at Morningstar, said Chinese EV makers were operating amid tougher competition and greater pricing pressures.
The declines came after BYD knocked Tesla off the top spot as the world’s best-selling EV maker, as measured by sales in the last quarter of 2023.
Share $Chinese EV stocks fall as competition puts pressure on carmakers on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Chinese EV stocks fall as competition puts pressure on carmakers on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Chinese EV stocks fall as competition puts pressure on carmakers on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 03, 02:16
Asia-Pacific equities decline as hopes for US interest rate cuts dim
FT reporters
Most Asia-Pacific markets opened lower on Wednesday morning in line with falling investor confidence that the US will cut interest rates.
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index dropped 1 per cent as Alibaba shares continued their slide, declining more than 2.5 per cent. Tencent stocks fell more than 1 per cent.
South Korea’s Kospi retreated nearly 2 per cent, while Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 index declined 1 per cent. China’s CSI 300 was flat, and Japan’s Topix inched up 0.2 per cent.
On Tuesday, the S&P 500 fell 0.6 per cent, dragged down by tech stocks. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite slid 1.6 per cent, notching its worst daily fall since late October.
The US Federal Reserve begins its next two-day interest rate-setting meeting on January 30.
Share $Asia-Pacific equities decline as hopes for US interest rate cuts dim on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Asia-Pacific equities decline as hopes for US interest rate cuts dim on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Asia-Pacific equities decline as hopes for US interest rate cuts dim on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 23:00
Donald Trump sues over removal from Maine primary ballot
Lauren Fedor in Washington
Donald Trump has filed a lawsuit to reinstate his name on Maine’s presidential primary ballot.
Last week, Maine blocked the former president from the state ballot, saying Trump was disqualified from holding higher office for his role in the January 6 2021 attack on the US Capitol.
Trump on Tuesday asked a superior court in Maine to reverse the decision by Shenna Bellows, Maine’s secretary of state, saying she was a “biased decision-maker” who should have recused herself.
Bellows, who was appointed secretary of state by Maine’s state legislature, previously ran for the US Senate as a Democrat.
Share $Donald Trump sues over removal from Maine primary ballot on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Donald Trump sues over removal from Maine primary ballot on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Donald Trump sues over removal from Maine primary ballot on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 22:56
Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate
Jaren Kerr in New York
US stocks declined in the first session of the year, while Treasury yields surged as traders moderated expectations for interest rate cuts.
The benchmark S&P 500 fell 0.6 per cent, dragged down by tech stocks. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite slid 1.6 per cent, notching its worst daily fall since late October.
Yields on the rate-sensitive two-year Treasury rose 0.07 percentage points to 4.32 per cent, while the yield on the 10-year note rose 0.08 percentage points to 3.94 per cent, having topped 4 per cent earlier.
The dollar rose 0.9 per cent against a basket of six peers.
Share $Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 22:50
Moderna shares surge 15.5% after Oppenheimer upgrade
Jaren Kerr in New York
Moderna’s shares surged 15.5 per cent after investment bank Oppenheimer upgraded its stock in anticipation of new product launches in the next 12 to 18 months.
Other stock moves to watch on the New York Stock Exchange include Apple and Avangrid.
Shares in Apple slid 3.6 per cent after the iPhone maker’s stock was downgraded by a Barclays analyst due to weak hardware sales and concerns about softening revenue in its services unit.
US energy provider Avangrid rose 3.3 per cent after its Spanish parent Iberdrola called off its $8.3bn acquisition of US-based PNM Resources.
Share $Moderna shares surge 15.5% after Oppenheimer upgrade on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Moderna shares surge 15.5% after Oppenheimer upgrade on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Moderna shares surge 15.5% after Oppenheimer upgrade on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 22:45
Chevron warns ‘harsh’ California policies harm earnings and investment
Jamie Smyth in New York
Chevron on Tuesday said a deepening rift with lawmakers over energy policy in California would dent its earnings in the fourth quarter and further reduce its investment plans for its home state.
“Continuing regulatory challenges” would contribute to a non-cash charge of $3.5bn-$4bn, the oil company said, reflecting a writedown in the value of its US upstream oil and gas assets, primarily in California.
The charge will also include a loss related to decommissioning obligations linked to assets it previously owned in the Gulf of Mexico.
Share $Chevron warns ‘harsh’ California policies harm earnings and investment on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Chevron warns ‘harsh’ California policies harm earnings and investment on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Chevron warns ‘harsh’ California policies harm earnings and investment on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
