After a breathless 2023 on her beat, we caught up with the FT’s Artificial Intelligence editor Madhumita Murgia to ask what breakthroughs she is expecting in the year ahead.
Generative AI will go mobile
Her first prediction was easy: AI will start to transform smartphones.
“Google has already said it plans to integrate its AI model Gemini into its Pixel phones,” said Madhu. “You will be able to ask your phone for stuff like, ‘Can you find me that picture of me on that date?’”
Meanwhile, Apple is not too far behind. “They have hired quite a few people in France who are shrinking these AI models and making them low latency and low power [so they can work on phones],” she said.
Big Tech will help other industries roll out AI
Until now, AI has looked interesting, but few companies have found ways to integrate it into their businesses. Now Madhu says the Big Tech companies are on a mission to help business develop AI tools.
“Microsoft is doing a really big push and has made law firms a top priority. Allen and Overy is going to introduce its first AI contract writer, and Microsoft is also working with LexisNexis,” she said. “And Google has just done a partnership with Hiscox, the insurer.” 
“The tech companies need to work with other companies to get them up to speed. This is much more than just selling them a package, they have to show them uses and get them to adopt them.”
There will be another big jump in technology
“Everybody is predicting artificial general intelligence in the next 5-7 years,” said Madhu. But before then, she is expecting to see more AI models that can behave autonomously rather than having to wait for prompts.
“For example, you could see AI being capable of long-term planning and chains of reasoning; working out the steps to doing something and reasoning, planning and executing that action,” she said.
As an early taste of what’s on the way, Madhu pointed to an event where she saw Sam Altman, the chief executive of OpenAI, ask AI to find ten people in the audience who had spent a certain amount of time on ChatGPT and pay $500 in computer credit into their accounts.
Our favourite pieces
Henry Mance’s interview with the idiosyncratic productivity guru Oliver Burkeman was exactly what, more than a little worse for wear, I wanted to read on New Year’s day. Replace your to-do lists with do-later lists, scrap that gym membership and cut yourself some slack.
Hannah Rock
Deputy editor, FT Edit (@HannahRockFT)
Australia’s most important cultural export this century is an animated children’s show that has won little hearts the world over. Our Big Read on the global dominance of Bluey drills down to what makes the unabashedly Australian show a sensation.
Caryn Wilson
US editor, FT Edit (@CarynAWilson)
Our favourite fact of the week …
Some 2bn people, about half the adult population of the globe, will have the chance to vote in 2024, far more in one year than ever before. Eight of the 10 most populous countries are among the more than 70 states holding elections. From Can democracy survive 2024?
Something to listen to
Unhedged — Two episodes of Unhedged, one looking back, the other forward. First, the Unhedgies, our awards for the financial world with categories including scam of the year and central banker of the year (it’s the FT, what did you expect?)
And if you want to have a look at the year ahead, in part two our market gurus try to figure out if a prediction is made by Wall Street or ChatGPT, with a few forecasts of their own.
Click to listen
A look back and a look into 2024

Ethan Wu, Katie Martin and other markets nerds at the Financial Times explain the big ideas behind what’s happening in finance right now, and how Wall Street's best minds could respond
Part One
Part Two

Rachman Review — The European Union contends with some big issues in 2024, including parliamentary elections in June and the question of whether the bloc will accept new members.
Click to listen
The future of Europe
Gideon Rachman, the Financial Times chief foreign affairs columnist, meets the decision-makers and thinkers who are shaping world affairs. Listen in on reflective and often probing conversations with politicians, intellectuals and analysts around the globe.
Behind the money — Amy Edmondson, author of the FT’s Business Book of the Year Right Kind of Wrong, tells explains why Silicon Valley gets failure so wrong.
Click to listen
Author Amy Edmondson on 'intelligent failure'
Behind the Money takes you inside the business and financial stories of the moment with reporting from Financial Times journalists around the world. Host Michela Tindera follows reporters as they dig into stories about money and power.
Something to watch
For years South Africa has been dealing with the side-effects of rampant corruption and nowhere is that corruption more evident than at the state power provider Eskom. This FT film takes a look at just how bad the problems are.
Talk to us
We love feedback. Let us know what themes you’re curious about and what features you want to see. Email us at ftedit@ft.com.
