JAN 02, 17:05
Drone strike in Beirut kills Hamas’s political deputy, says state media
Raya Jalabi
Lebanese state media said that an Israeli drone struck a Hamas political office in south Beirut on Tuesday, killing at least three people and wounding three others. 
JAN 02, 22:16
Trump sues over Maine ballot rejection
Lauren Fedor in Washington
© AP
Donald Trump has filed a lawsuit to reinstate his name on Maine’s presidential primary ballot.
Last week, Maine’s secretary of state blocked Trump from the state ballot, saying the former president was disqualified from holding higher office for his role in the January 6 2021 attack on the US Capitol.
Trump on Tuesday asked a superior court in Maine to reverse the decision by Shenna Bellows, Maine’s secretary of state, saying she was a “biased decisionmaker” who should have recused herself. Bellows, who was appointed secretary of state by Maine’s state legislature, previously ran for the US Senate as a Democrat.
Share $Trump sues over Maine ballot rejection on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Trump sues over Maine ballot rejection on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Trump sues over Maine ballot rejection on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
JAN 02, 21:22
Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate
Jaren Kerr in New York
US stocks declined in the first session of the year, while Treasury yields surged as traders moderated expectations for interest rate cuts.
The benchmark S&P 500 fell 0.6 per cent, dragged down by tech stocks. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite slid 1.6 per cent, notching its worst daily fall since late October.
Yields on the rate-sensitive two-year Treasury rose 0.07 percentage points to 4.32 per cent, while the yield on the 10-year note rose 0.08 percentage points to 3.94 per cent, having topped 4 per cent earlier in the session. The dollar rose 0.9 per cent against a basket of six peers.
Share $Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Treasury yields surge and US stocks fall as rate cut bets moderate on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 18:40
Risers and fallers in the US
Jaren Kerr in New York
Stock moves to watch on the New York Stock Exchange include Apple, Moderna, and Avangrid.
•
Moderna’s shares surged 15.5 per cent after investment bank Oppenheimer upgraded its stock in anticipation of new product launches in the next 12 to 18 months.
•
Shares in Apple slid 3.6 per cent after the iPhone maker’s stock was downgraded by a Barclays analyst due to weak hardware sales and concerns about softening revenue in its services unit.
•
US energy provider Avangrid rose 3.3 per cent after its Spanish parent Iberdrola called off its $8.3bn acquisition of US-based PNM Resources.
Share $Risers and fallers in the US on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in the US on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in the US on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 18:31
Harvard president Claudine Gay to resign after Israel-Hamas controversy
Joshua Chaffin in New York
Claudine Gay will resign as president of Harvard University following a widely criticised appearance at a Congressional hearing on campus antisemitism amid the Israel-Hamas war, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Gay was Harvard’s first black president and took office only in July, making hers the shortest presidency in the university’s history. Her performance at the hearing then prompted scrutiny of plagiarism allegations against her.
Her resignation, which is expected later on Tuesday, was first reported by student newspaper the Harvard Crimson. It follows that of Elizabeth Magill, former president of the University of Pennsylvania, who also testified at the Congressional hearing last month.
Share $Harvard president Claudine Gay to resign after Israel-Hamas controversy on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Harvard president Claudine Gay to resign after Israel-Hamas controversy on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Harvard president Claudine Gay to resign after Israel-Hamas controversy on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 16:49
European stocks close lower as rate cut optimism cools
George Steer in London
European stocks fell on Tuesday and oil prices swung lower as traders began the new year by partially unwinding bullish bets on the future path of interest rates.
The region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.2 per cent, while France’s Cac 40 fell by the same amount. Germany’s Dax rose 0.1 per cent. London’s FTSE 100 lost 0.3 per cent.
US stocks fared worse, with the S&P 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite down 0.5 per cent and 1.3 per cent. 
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, fell 1 per cent to $76.29 a barrel, having earlier on Tuesday jumped over 2 per cent.  

Share $European stocks close lower as rate cut optimism cools on X (opens in a new window)
Share $European stocks close lower as rate cut optimism cools on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $European stocks close lower as rate cut optimism cools on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 14:51
US stocks fall as investors ease bets on rapid rate cuts
Stephanie Stacey in London
US stocks dropped on Tuesday, pulled lower by poor performance in technology stocks as investors lose confidence in rapid interest rate cuts from the Federal Reserve.
Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 fell 0.7 per cent in early trading in New York, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite dropped 1.4 per cent.
The so-called “magnificent seven” major tech stocks — Apple, Microsoft, Meta, Amazon, Alphabet, Nvidia and Tesla — all declined.
Markets rallied strongly in the final months of 2023 on the expectation of a first interest rate cut by the Fed at its next meeting in March. But confidence that cuts will come soon has declined.
Share $US stocks fall as investors ease bets on rapid rate cuts on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks fall as investors ease bets on rapid rate cuts on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US stocks fall as investors ease bets on rapid rate cuts on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 14:42
Rivian shares plunge after it misses EV delivery estimates
Steff Chávez in New York
© Bloomberg
Shares in Rivian plunged in early trading after the electric vehicle maker missed quarterly delivery expectations.
The California-based company, which produces its cars in Illinois, delivered 13,972 EVs in the final three months of 2023, missing analyst expectations of 14,114, as compiled by Bloomberg.
Rivian made 57,232 EVs in 2023, delivering 50,122, surpassing its production target of 54,000 and correcting course after supply chain issues forced the group to halve volumes the prior year.
The closely watched start-up is challenging traditional carmakers in the EV race but is far behind Tesla, which delivered almost 485,000 cars in the fourth quarter.
Rivian’s shares were down almost 9 per cent as trading opened in New York, extending pre-market losses.
Share $Rivian shares plunge after it misses EV delivery estimates on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Rivian shares plunge after it misses EV delivery estimates on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Rivian shares plunge after it misses EV delivery estimates on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 14:19
Chevron to take $4bn hit from California regulatory issues
Jamie Smyth in New York
Chevron has said it would record a fourth-quarter impairment loss of up to $4bn due to regulatory challenges in California and certain oil and gas production facilities in the Gulf of Mexico.
The “continuing” regulatory challenges in California regarding its upstream would lead to lower investment levels than it had anticipated, the US oil major said on Tuesday. Nevertheless, Chevron expects to operate the impacted assets for years to come.
The non-cash, after tax charge is projected to be between $3.5 and $4bn in its upcoming results, Chevron said.
It would also recognise a loss related to obligations from previously sold oil and gas production assets in the Gulf of Mexico.
Share $Chevron to take $4bn hit from California regulatory issues on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Chevron to take $4bn hit from California regulatory issues on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Chevron to take $4bn hit from California regulatory issues on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 14:01
Tesla overtaken by BYD as world’s biggest electric vehicle maker
Steff Chávez in New York
Tesla has lost its spot as the world’s top-selling electric vehicle manufacturer to Chinese group BYD after failing to deliver the blockbuster final three months of 2023 it needed to keep its status.

Elon Musk’s Tesla delivered 484,500 cars in the fourth quarter, more than the 483,000 anticipated by analysts polled by Bloomberg. The Austin, Texas-based company delivered a total of 1.81mn vehicles in 2023, surpassing its annual target.
Despite beating delivery expectations, Tesla was unseated by BYD, which sold 526,400 vehicles in the same period, outperforming the US manufacturer for the first time.
Share $Tesla overtaken by BYD as world’s biggest electric vehicle maker on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Tesla overtaken by BYD as world’s biggest electric vehicle maker on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Tesla overtaken by BYD as world’s biggest electric vehicle maker on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 13:56
US stock futures slide on revised outlook for rates
Stephanie Stacey in London
US stock futures slipped ahead of the New York trading session on Tuesday, as investors pare bets on interest rate cuts in 2024. 
Contracts tracking Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite were down 0.8 per cent and 1.2 per cent, respectively. 
At the end of last year, swaps markets were fully pricing in a 0.25 percentage point interest rate cut by the Federal Reserve in March. They now indicate less confidence in a cut.
Both futures indices made strong gains in the final months of 2023, driven by hopes that the Fed and other central banks had finished their aggressive rate-hiking campaigns. The S&P 500 is close to its record high of January 2022. 
Share $US stock futures slide on revised outlook for rates on X (opens in a new window)
Share $US stock futures slide on revised outlook for rates on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $US stock futures slide on revised outlook for rates on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 12:46
Dollar rallies as investors pare bets on interest rate cuts
Stephanie Stacey in London
The dollar rallied on Tuesday ahead of a busy week of US economic data, which could shape the outlook for interest rates in the world’s largest economy.
The greenback rose 0.7 per cent against a basket of six other major currencies, recovering slightly after hitting a five-month low at the end of 2023.
“Markets have started the year paring back some of their bets on a dovish Fed”, said ING FX strategist Francesco Pesole.
The dollar declined steeply in November and December as investors upped their bets on interest rate cuts from the Federal Reserve. Despite Tuesday’s gains, the currency remains more than 4.5 per cent below where it stood at the beginning of November. 
Share $Dollar rallies as investors pare bets on interest rate cuts on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Dollar rallies as investors pare bets on interest rate cuts on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Dollar rallies as investors pare bets on interest rate cuts on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 11:55
Stock and bond prices fall in cautious trading
George Steer in London
Global stock and bond prices fell on Tuesday as traders made a cautious start to the new year following a strong market rally in recent months.
Yields on benchmark 10-year US Treasuries rose 0.08 percentage points to 3.93 per cent as prices fell, while yields on UK 10-year gilts rose 0.12 percentage points to 3.66 per cent.
Stocks also lost ground, with Europe’s region-wide Stoxx 600 and London’s FTSE 100 both down 0.3 per cent. Contracts tracking Wall Street’s S&P 500 — which is just below its January 3 2022 record high — lost 0.6 per cent ahead of the New York open.
In currency markets, the US dollar rose 0.6 per cent against a basket of six international peers.
Share $Stock and bond prices fall in cautious trading on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Stock and bond prices fall in cautious trading on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Stock and bond prices fall in cautious trading on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 10:35
Oil jumps on concerns over Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping
George Steer in London
Oil prices jumped on Tuesday on mounting concerns over Houthi rebel attacks on commercial vessels in the Red Sea, one of the world’s most important trade corridors.
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, rose 2.3 per cent to $78.80 a barrel. WTI, the US equivalent, also rose 2.3 per cent to $73.27 a barrel.
The moves came on the first trading session since US Navy helicopters on Sunday fired at Houthi boats that were attacking an AP Moller-Maersk container ship in the Red Sea.
Share $Oil jumps on concerns over Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Oil jumps on concerns over Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Oil jumps on concerns over Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 09:59
Crew missing from Japan Coast Guard aircraft after collision with Japan Airlines passenger jet
Leo Lewis and Kana Inagaki in Tokyo
Your device appears to be offline. Reconnect to the internet to view.
The Japan Airlines aircraft on fire after the crash at Tokyo's Haneda Airport
Video description
The Japan Airlines aircraft on fire after the crash at Tokyo's Haneda Airport
Five out of six crew members are missing from a Japan Coast Guard aircraft that collided with a Japan Airlines passenger jet at Tokyo’s Haneda airport, officials said.
All 367 passengers and 12 crew were evacuated from the JAL aircraft after it caught fire on Tuesday evening, according to the airline.
Live images of the JAL plane, which was flying from Sapporo in Hokkaido to the Japanese capital, appeared to show flames erupting from the aircraft shortly after it skidded down. Subsequent footage showed the entire fuselage engulfed in flames as emergency services battled to control the fire.
Share $Crew missing from Japan Coast Guard aircraft after collision with Japan Airlines passenger jet on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Crew missing from Japan Coast Guard aircraft after collision with Japan Airlines passenger jet on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Crew missing from Japan Coast Guard aircraft after collision with Japan Airlines passenger jet on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 09:37
Indonesian stock market hits record high
John Aglionby in London
Indonesia’s stock market hit a record high on Tuesday after core inflation fell to a two-year low of 1.8 per cent.
The Jakarta Composite Index rose 0.7 per cent to 7,323.6, breaking through the previous closing high of 7,318 reached in September 2022.
There were 79 new listings on the Jakarta stock market last year, driven largely by nickel and other commodity companies.
Despite inflation falling, the central bank governor has said that interest rates are unlikely to be cut from the current 6 per cent in the first half of 2024.
Indonesians go to the polls on February 14 to elect both a new president and a new parliament.
Share $Indonesian stock market hits record high on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Indonesian stock market hits record high on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Indonesian stock market hits record high on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 09:23
Bitcoin surges as investors bet on ETF approval
Stephanie Stacey in London
Bitcoin surged to its highest level since April 2022 on Tuesday amid speculation that the US Securities and Exchange Commission will soon grant regulatory approval for exchange traded funds tied to the cryptocurrency’s spot price. 
Bitcoin rose 5.1 per cent to $45,817, bringing its total gains since the beginning of October to 69 per cent.
BlackRock, Fidelity, WisdomTree, and Invesco are among the issuers hoping to introduce bitcoin-linked ETFs. 
Share $Bitcoin surges as investors bet on ETF approval on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Bitcoin surges as investors bet on ETF approval on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Bitcoin surges as investors bet on ETF approval on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 09:23
Risers and fallers in Europe
Maxine Kelly in London
Big share price moves in Europe today include Danish shipping company Maersk, German airline Lufthansa and UK retailer Marks and Spencer: 
•
Maersk: Shares in the Danish shipping giant leapt more than 4 per cent in early trading as the company said it would not send vessels to the Suez Canal and Red Sea following Houthi rebels’ recent attacks on ships in the area. 
•
Lufthansa: Shares in the German airline slipped 1.4 per cent after brokers at Citigroup cut their target price for the company and lowered its rating to sell from neutral.
•
Marks and Spencer: The UK food and clothing retailer’s shares rose 2 per cent after BNP Paribas lifted its rating to outperform from neutral.
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Risers and fallers in Europe on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 08:49
Russian missile attack targets Kyiv and Kharkiv
Anastasia Stognei and Roman Olearchyk
Russia carried out a heavy missile attack on Ukraine on Tuesday, hitting Kyiv and the Kharkiv region the hardest. One person was reported killed in the capital and dozens injured.
Serhiy Popko, head of Kyiv’s military administration, said that air defences intercepted many of the nearly 20 drones and dozens of missiles but that there was “destruction of residential buildings, damage to infrastructure”.
The attack came after President Vladimir Putin declared on Monday that Ukraine’s weekend attack on the Russian city of Belgorod, in which 24 civilians were killed, “will not go unpunished”.
One of the Russian missiles fired at Ukraine on Monday fell in its own border region of Voronezh and severely damaged several homes, the Russian defence ministry said.
Share $Russian missile attack targets Kyiv and Kharkiv on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Russian missile attack targets Kyiv and Kharkiv on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Russian missile attack targets Kyiv and Kharkiv on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 08:15
European stocks open higher on hopes of interest rate cuts
Stephanie Stacey in London
European stocks opened higher on the first trading day of the year, as investors remain confident that central banks will start cutting interest rates in the first half of 2024.
The region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 was up 0.4 per cent shortly after the opening bell, with basic materials and healthcare among the best-performing sectors.
France’s Cac 40 added 0.5 per cent, Germany’s Dax climbed 0.6 per cent, and London’s FTSE 100 gained 0.2 per cent.
Share $European stocks open higher on hopes of interest rate cuts on X (opens in a new window)
Share $European stocks open higher on hopes of interest rate cuts on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $European stocks open higher on hopes of interest rate cuts on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 08:09
Iberdrola calls off $8.3bn acquisition of PNM Resources
Barney Jopson in Madrid
Iberdrola has called off the $8.3bn acquisition of PNM Resources in the US, cancelling a deal that would have transformed its Avangrid subsidiary into one of the biggest companies in the American utilities sector.
The company had yet to receive the necessary regulatory approval from one body, New Mexico’s Public Regulation Commission, and said that as a consequence it was exercising a right to terminate the deal.
The New Mexico regulator rejected the deal at the end of 2021. Iberdrola had been appealing against its decision in the courts, but Avangrid said: “With the close of 2023 there is still no clear timing on the resolution of the court review of the New Mexico regulator’s denial of the merger nor any subsequent regulatory actions.”
Share $Iberdrola calls off $8.3bn acquisition of PNM Resources on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Iberdrola calls off $8.3bn acquisition of PNM Resources on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Iberdrola calls off $8.3bn acquisition of PNM Resources on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 07:58
UK expects asylum approval rate to drop this year
John Aglionby and Lucy Fisher in London
UK home secretary James Cleverly has forecast that the proportion of asylum seekers who are allowed to stay in the country is likely to drop as a result of new laws.
“We’ve put in place tougher legislation, so . . . we will have a tighter set of criteria than we had in the past,” he told Sky News. “We should see that proportion of grants probably coming down.”
New Home Office figures show that about 67 per cent of 112,000 asylum applications processed last year were approved, down from about 76 per cent the year before.
While the government claimed victory on Monday for having cleared 92,000 “legacy” asylum cases that were outstanding up to June 2022, Cleverly admitted to the BBC that it was “impossible to say” how long it will take to process the remaining 98,000 cases.
Share $UK expects asylum approval rate to drop this year on X (opens in a new window)
Share $UK expects asylum approval rate to drop this year on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $UK expects asylum approval rate to drop this year on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 05:06
Asian markets dip after China posts lukewarm factory output data
Hudson Lockett in Hong Kong
Equity markets in Asia were broadly lower on the first trading day of the year after Chinese economic data underwhelmed.
In Hong Kong, the benchmark Hang Seng index shed 1.5 per cent on return from the new year holiday, while China’s CSI 300 fell 1 per cent, though Japan’s Topix broke ranks with a rise of 0.2 per cent.
The falls in Asian trading came after official readings on Sunday revealed Chinese factory activity contracted in December for a third straight month.
Share $Asian markets dip after China posts lukewarm factory output data on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Asian markets dip after China posts lukewarm factory output data on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Asian markets dip after China posts lukewarm factory output data on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 03:56
Japan quake toll rises to 30 as military joins relief effort
Kana Inagaki in Tokyo
The earthquake caused cracks to appear in a bridge across the Shichimi river in the city of Wajima, Ishikawa prefecture, on Monday © Kyodo via AP
Japan’s military joined efforts to rescue survivors and provide emergency relief after a powerful earthquake on the west coast on New Year’s Day left at least 30 dead and dozens injured.
Prime Minister Fumio Kishida said on Tuesday that authorities were in a “battle against time” to respond to the emergency, as daylight and the lifting of the previous night’s tsunami warnings allowed a fuller picture of the devastation.
“We are going to continue our efforts from overnight to make sure that we can get the necessary supplies and personnel into the areas by fully mobilising not just land transport but also routes via air and sea,” he said.
Read more about the earthquake here.
Share $Japan quake toll rises to 30 as military joins relief effort on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Japan quake toll rises to 30 as military joins relief effort on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Japan quake toll rises to 30 as military joins relief effort on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 03:02
South Korean opposition leader stabbed during airport site visit
Christian Davies in Seoul
The leader of South Korea’s leftwing opposition was stabbed in the neck during a visit to the southern port of Busan on Tuesday morning.
Lee Jae-myung, who was defeated by conservative Yoon Suk Yeol by a margin of less than 1 per cent in the last presidential election in 2022, was attacked as he visited the site of a proposed airport.
Lee is reported to be conscious and receiving treatment. According to local media, Lee’s alleged assailant was a man in his 50 or 60s wearing a paper crown with Lee’s name on it.
Lee is being tried on bribery charges relating to a development project while he was mayor of the city of Seongnam. His Democratic party will face Yoon’s People Power party in parliamentary elections in April.
Share $South Korean opposition leader stabbed during airport site visit on X (opens in a new window)
Share $South Korean opposition leader stabbed during airport site visit on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $South Korean opposition leader stabbed during airport site visit on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 02, 02:24
China’s Baidu scraps $3.6bn acquisition of live-streaming group Joyy
Gloria Li in Hong Kong
Baidu has terminated its proposed $3.6bn acquisition of Nasdaq-listed Joyy Group’s live-streaming business in China, the Chinese search engine giant said on Monday.
The deal fell through after conditions for its completion “had not been fully satisfied”, including obtaining regulatory approvals, Baidu said in a filing with the Hong Kong stock exchange.
Moon, a Baidu affiliate, initiated the share purchase agreement in 2020, aiming to acquire Joyy’s YY Live, a domestic video-based entertainment live-streaming platform.
The surprise termination of the deal is seen as a setback to Baidu’s efforts to diversify revenue and a sign of continuity in Beijing’s crackdown on blockbuster technology deals.
Joyy said in a separate statement that it is seeking legal advice.
Share $China’s Baidu scraps $3.6bn acquisition of live-streaming group Joyy on X (opens in a new window)
Share $China’s Baidu scraps $3.6bn acquisition of live-streaming group Joyy on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $China’s Baidu scraps $3.6bn acquisition of live-streaming group Joyy on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 01, 23:47
Chipmaking equipment supplier ASML suspends some China exports
George Russell in Hong Kong
Chipmaking equipment manufacturer ASML has been forced to curb some exports to China after the Dutch government partially revoked its export licence, the company said on Monday.
The revocation affects shipments of advanced lithography systems, ASML said in a statement. The restriction had been expected after The Hague followed the US and Japan last year in imposing tough curbs on technology exports. 
ASML, based in the Dutch town of Veldhoven, said it had been in “discussions” with Washington to obtain “further clarification of the scope and impact of the US export control regulations”.
“We do not expect the current revocation of our export licence or the latest US export control restrictions to have a material impact on our financial outlook for 2023,” the company statement added.
Share $Chipmaking equipment supplier ASML suspends some China exports on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Chipmaking equipment supplier ASML suspends some China exports on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Chipmaking equipment supplier ASML suspends some China exports on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 01, 22:55
What to watch in Asia today
FT reporters
Singapore-based ecoWise, which focuses on renewable energy and waste management, reports first-quarter earnings on Tuesday © ecoWise
China: The China Foreign Exchange Trade System & National Interbank Funding Center launches interbank forex trading for Macau’s pataca in currency pairs with the renminbi, US dollar and Hong Kong dollar.
Public holidays: Markets in Japan, South Korea and New Zealand are closed.
Economic indicators: China’s private Caixin purchasing managers’ index for manufacturing in December is released. Nikkei issues a December manufacturing PMI for South Korea.
Corporate updates: Singapore renewable energy company ecoWise reports first-quarter results.
Share $What to watch in Asia today on X (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in Asia today on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $What to watch in Asia today on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 01, 22:45
Russia launches ‘record’ wave of drones against Ukraine
Roman Olearchyk in Lviv
Russia launched a “record” 90 drones in attacks on Ukraine that killed several people and left dozens injured, Kyiv officials have said.
Most of the drones were downed by its air defences, Ukraine said on Monday. The attacks came just days after Moscow’s deadliest strikes on Ukrainian cities in almost two years of war.
Air strikes continued into New Year’s Day, with Kyiv saying its air defences had intercepted a drone attack on the Ukrainian capital and a missile targeting the central city of Dnipro.
Read more about the war in Ukraine here.
Share $Russia launches ‘record’ wave of drones against Ukraine on X (opens in a new window)
Share $Russia launches ‘record’ wave of drones against Ukraine on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $Russia launches ‘record’ wave of drones against Ukraine on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
JAN 01, 22:42
The week ahead
FT reporters
US politics gets back to work this week, as President Joe Biden returns on Tuesday from his holiday in the US Virgin Islands, while Congress convenes on Wednesday for a largely ceremonial opening session.
Former president and likely 2024 contender Donald Trump stumps in Iowa this week. On Wednesday the Federal Open Market Committee issues minutes from its December 12 2023 meeting.
Wild weather is also set to make headlines as Japan cleans up after an earthquake and tsunami that killed at least four people. The US National Weather Service has issued alerts for the east coast as a potential storm gathers, while Australia is bracing for more storms along much of its eastern seaboard.
In the UK, Eurostar services have been restored after a tunnel flooded in Kent last weekend, but Tube passengers face industrial action from Friday by the RMT union’s engineering and maintenance workers. The NHS junior doctors’ strike resumes on Wednesday.
Passengers wait for news of Eurostar departures at St Pancras station in London on Saturday © Henry Nicholls/AFP via Getty Images
Among companies, electric-vehicle maker Tesla on Tuesday is set to report record production in 2023. Rival Rivian is also due to announce quarterly deliveries.
The US Securities and Exchange Commission is expected on Tuesday or Wednesday to grant regulatory approval for the launch of exchange traded funds tied to the spot price of bitcoin. BlackRock Asset Management, Fidelity, Invesco and WisdomTree Investments are among those seeking to introduce the ETFs.
Other events expected this week:
•
Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi visits Ankara.
•
Bank of Israel to cut short-term rates for the first time in nearly four years.
•
Argentina’s new government plans to eliminate 160 regulations that it says hinder economic activity.
•
Bangladesh holds a parliamentary election.
Read Jonathan Moules’s preview of The Year Ahead here.
Share $The week ahead on X (opens in a new window)
Share $The week ahead on Facebook (opens in a new window)
Share $The week ahead on LinkedIn (opens in a new window)
Back to top
