It is with a great deal of resigned horror and profound ennui that we have to remind FT Alphaville readers that the US presidential election is now less than a year away. 😐🔫
Naturally, the sellside is now polishing off its spreadsheets and looking at what the investment implications of another round of Biden vs Trump might be, beyond, you know, mere existential angst.
Goldman Sachs’s chief US equity strategist David Kostin points out that equity returns have tended to be more subdued in presidential election years.
The problem is that you shouldn’t read anything into that, given several have recently taken place against a cruddy backdrop of pandemics, global financial crises and bursting tech bubbles.
Equity returns tend to be weaker than average in election years. Since 1932, the S&P 500 has averaged a 7% return in the 12 months preceding the election compared with a 9% average return outside of election years. Pre-election returns have been even weaker in recent history, with the S&P 500 posting an average return of just 4% in the 12 months ahead of the 10 presidential elections since 1984.
However, the sample of recent elections is skewed by the onset of recessions that occurred around the 2000, 2008 and 2020 elections. Excluding these recessionary election years, the S&P 500 has posted an average 9% return in the years before presidential elections since 1984 vs. 11% in non-election years. GS Economics assigns just a 15% likelihood that a recession begins during the next 12 months, well below the 55% level for the median forecaster according to Bloomberg.
Election year equity returns are typically driven entirely by profit growth. Real GDP growth has grown at a median 3.5% in the calendar year of presidential elections since 1984 compared with 2.7% growth in non-election years. Corporate profits have typically grown at a fast clip alongside this robust GDP growth: S&P 500 EPS has typically grown 9.0% in election years vs. 7.5% in non-election years.
While earnings usually grow during election years, equity valuations typically move sideways. In the median experience since 1984, the S&P 500 forward P/E has declined by 2% in the 12 months preceding Election Day. During the same 12-month windows, 10-year Treasury yields have declined by a median of 39 bp, meaning the equity risk premium has typically climbed ahead of elections. The gap between the S&P 500 earnings yield and the nominal 10-year Treasury yield has risen by 42 bp in the median election year since 1984. The yield gap stands at 93 bp today, putting equity valuations relative to bonds in the 75th percentile since 1984.
But it seems that markets really like elections being over, whoever actually wins, but especially if it leads to political paralysis.
Equities typically generate strong returns in the weeks following presidential elections as uncertainty dissipates. The Policy Uncertainty index typically declines in the weeks following the election as investors gain clarity on the potential policy impact of the election result. In the median election year since 1984, the S&P 500 returned 5.0% in the eight weeks from Election Day through year-end, compared with a 2.6% return during the comparable period at the end of non-election years. Postelection returns have typically been stronger when the election resulted in a divided government than a unified government, especially in the case of a wave election.
Gluttons for punishment can read the full Goldman Sachs note from Kostin here.
